4.	Co-Generation Plants	


As discussed, Smart Grid may incorporate distributed generation (DG) and co-generation of energy thru solar or wind resources. These may operate in parallel with the legacy grid, as well as independent of it for extended periods of time; often depending on the source of power and availability of energy storage systems.


This chapter begins with a review of solar power generation and solar photovoltaic (PV) technology and applications. It explores technical considerations involved in the selection and integration of solar photovoltaic systems within distributed generations.
Moreover, a case study will be described: the solar photovoltaic system of the Energy OASIS microgrid at British Columbia Institute of Technology (BCIT) in Burnaby, BC, Canada. The requirements and specifications of that system will be reviewed. This include the project specifications, design requirements and equipment selection considerations. The chapter then continues with a review of wind power generation, technologies and applications. A case study on a vertical axis wind turbine installation at BCIT will also be described.
4.1.	Solar installations:

Solar energy is what could be converted of sun’s radiation thru either passive or active means to do useful work as light, thermal energy (heat) or electric power. Two active, and more common, solar technologies are: solar collectors and solar photovoltaic (PV). Solar collectors employ electrical or mechanical equipment to provide water heating or air ventilation.
Solar PV technology is used to generate electricity. This chapter focuses on the solar photovoltaic power and technology; a technology that uses photovoltaic materials and devices to
 
convert sunlight directly into electricity.


Solar Photovoltaic Systems Applications: Mainstream applications of solar PV power systems could be mapped into three main categories: large solar power plants integrated with the grid at the transmission level; medium solar power plants integrated within microgrids at the distribution level; and last but not least small rooftop PV’s integrated with customer side assets. Notwithstanding their Point of Common Coupling with the grid, PV installations conform to similar topology and setup, with differences in the capabilities of their power conversion interface, availability, or lack thereof storage, ancillary services, etc.


Solar Photovoltaic Systems Main Components: A solar PV system comprises of solar PV modules (panels) which convert solar radiation directly into electricity through photovoltaic effect. Solar PV modules must be mounted on a structure. This is required in order to provide solar panels with the protection and structural support they need, and keep them oriented in the correct direction. The mounting systems may be at a fixed tilt and attached to the ground, or on sun-tracking frames. As shown in Fig 4.1, the balance-of-system (BOS) normally refers to the other electrical components of solar PV systems, other than solar photovoltaic panels, and may include protection and safety devices, power conditioning equipment and inverters. Power conditioning equipment provide DC electricity to the DC loads. When required, inverters are employed to convert DC electricity generated by solar PV modules into AC. Alternating current can then be used for connection to public electricity grid or be distributed to support local AC loads. In grid-tied applications, interconnection with public utility is required. PCC or point of common coupling (also known as point of interconnection (POI) or point of delivery) is the point
 
where the utility’s distribution system and the distributed generation installation interconnect. For overhead service connections, PCC is typically at the weather head. For underground service connections, PCC is at the revenue meter base. PCC may also include breakers, switches and protection devices and equipment. Usually the utility is responsible for design, construction, maintenance, and operation of all facilities on the utility side of the PCC, while the distributed generation plant is responsible for design, construction, inspection, maintenance, and operation of all facilities on its side of the PCC. Most off-grid applications include some sort of energy storage and require storage charge/discharge controllers.


Solar PV Project Development: The development of a typical solar PV project can be broken
 
down into many stages, including conceptual study, feasibility study and design and construction [1]. This section introduces considerations which owners and stakeholders for distributed generation plants need to take into account when planning a solar PV project.
Typical scope for feasibility study of such projects includes, but not limited to, creation of a detailed site plan, detailed site assessment, assessments of solar resources, environmental characteristic, assessment of technology options, and system design constraints.


The development phase will then take the project from feasibility stage through to completion and may include the selection of solar PV modules, preparation and submission of permit applications, tendering process, selection and ranking contractors, purchasing and procurement processes, installation, testing and commissioning. An overview of different phases involved in the realization of typical PV projects is provided here:


Conceptual Study: Assuming that an opportunity for the design and construction of solar PV

installation is identified, this stage focusses on clarifying the objectives of the project and how this system should function to meet its performance requirements.


Feasibility Study: This stage will provide stakeholders with an early assessment of the potential

for the solar PV project, and the high level requirements of the project, outlining what could be achieved at what cost and at what timeframe. The study should provide staekholders enough information for them to make the appropriate commitments required to realize the solar PV project. Such feasibility study may include the following components:
 
Site Assessment: The first step in evaluating the potential of solar electricity is a site assessment.

Accurate and comprehensive site assessments are critical for the success of solar PV projects. Through site survey, the professionals responsible for the design, installation, commissioning, operation and maintenance of the system will be able to capture the information required to develop technical specifications and financial proposals. Site survey will help correctly budget for, and design the system. An efficient site survey will ensure the success of the project. There are tools and applications that can be used to make sure all the information is collected during a site visit.


Shading: Solar PV modules are extremely sensitive to shading. PV cells within a PV module are

typically connected in series. The amount of current flowing through a module may be limited by the weakest point in that module such as a shaded spot. In addition, the shaded spot will heat up to the point which may become damaged since it would be acting like a resistor, stopping the flow of current. Therefore, when evaluating potential locations to mount solar PV arrays, a shading analysis needs to be performed. This will identify when and where shading will occur taking the seasonal variations into consideration. In most cases, the ideal location for a solar array is a higher structure such as building roofs or solar parking canopies. Currently, there are several tools and applications that professionals use to determine the most economical and efficient photovoltaic array location and position. Such tools can be employed to create an accurate solar site analysis thru combining site-specific shading data with the published global weather data. Such data can be applied to architectural, engineering, solar, and ecological applications.
 
Geotechnical investigation: When it comes to the installation of a cost effective support

structure; selection of the foundation for the mounting structure is critical and depends on the type of the mounting system. A proper investigation of subsurface condition must be carried out to avoid selection of wrong foundation type and materials. An inadequate geo-technical survey can later lead to costly changes to design and procurement, which in turn may delay the project completion date.


Estimate Irradiation/Insolation: It is important to understand how much sunshine a specific site

receives on a regular basis. The usual figure of merit is peak sun hours (PSH) per day. For example, the data retrieved from Natural Resources Canada's website indicates that Vancouver receives an average of 3.7 sun hours per day. Same source reveals that Phoenix has a daily average of 6.9 sun hours [2].


Orientation: Solar PV modules will produce the most energy when the sun is shining directly

onto them, thru a 90 degree angle. However this is not always possible and a correction factor must be applied for the projects that are not at the perfect tilt. Properly aiming modules with an appropriate tilt will maximize the solar energy that the PV array collects. Although there are some general rules; for example a tilt angle equal to the latitude of the site will maximize yearly performance; however that’s not all. There are other considerations such as a tilt which can lower the impact of snow accumulation in winter. Or a tilt that maximize the seasonal performance of a solar PV system. This needs to be carefully analyzed and assessed.


Soiling: Soiling refers to the accumulation of dust, dirt, leaves, and bird droppings on the solar
 
PV modules. Dirt and dust particles can degrade the output of a solar PV panel by as much as 6% over the period of a year. This should be considered when selecting a proper site, solar PV modules and developing an effective inspection and maintenance plan.


Proximity to Electrical Services: Another consideration when determining a suitable site for a

solar PV system is proximity to other electrical components of the system. This may include point of delivery, main distribution panel, and loads. Close proximity to other components of a solar PV system will reduce the wire losses and voltage drops, which in turn results in installation of smaller conductors and reduced cost of procurement and implementation.


Technology Fundamentals:  A number of solar PV cells interconnect to compose a solar PV

module (or panel). Solar PV modules are the most critical components of a solar photovoltaoic system[3, 4]. There are a wide range of PV cell technologies in the market today using different types of material, such as:
-	Wafer-based Crystalline Silicon Technology; are the most prevalent technology and are classified as either Mono-Crystalline Silicon (c-Si) or Poly-Crystalline Silicon (mc-Si). Mono-Crystalline cells are extremely thin wafers of silicon, cut from a single silicon crystal. Solar cells in monocrystalline panels are slices cut from pure drawn crystalline silicon bars. The entire cell is aligned in one direction, which means that when the sun is shining brightly on them at the correct angle, they are extremely efficient. These panels work best in bright sunshine with the sun shining directly on them. They have a uniform blacker color because they absorb most of the light. Mono-Crystalline cells are also the most efficient type of c-Si cells. Higher efficiency means space efficiency. With higher
 
output less space is needed to achieve the desired capacity. Mono-Crystalline panels have a life expectancy exceeding 25 years. They have better low temperature performance than mc-Si cells. Today, Mono-Crystalline cells are known to be the most commercialized solar PV technology. However, they are the most expensive of all solar cells.
Poly-crystalline panels are made up of silicon offcuts which are constructed to form blocks and create a cell made up of several pieces of pure crystal. The individual crystals are not necessarily all perfectly aligned together, which means there may be losses at the joints between them, and they are not quite as efficient as c-Si cells. However, this misalignment can help in some circumstances, because the cells work better under light at all angles, and in low light. Typically, mc-Si solar PV cells operate at a lower efficiency than c-Si cells due to the fact that the material has a lower purity. Poly Crystalline modules are less space-efficient, as well. One other drawback of mc-Si modules is that their heat tolerance is less than c-Si panels, which means they don't perform as efficiently in high temperatures. Poly-crystalline panels may be better suited to the duller conditions, although the difference is marginal.
-	Thin-ﬁlm Technology is characterized by the slimness of the PV cell. Unlike wafer-based crystalline silicon cells, which have light-absorbing layers that are traditionally 200-350 microns thick, thin-film solar cells have light-absorbing layers that are just one micron thick. Thin-film solar cells are made by depositing several layers of a light absorbing semiconductor onto a substrate, coated glass, metal or plastic. The semiconductors don't have to be thick because they absorb energy from the sun very efficiently. As a result, thin-film solar cells are lightweight, durable and easy to use. There are three main types of thin-film solar cells, depending on the type of semiconductors used: Amorphous
 
Silicon (a-Si), Cadmium Telluride (CdTe) and Copper Indium (Gallium) De-Selenide (CIS/CIGS). Each has its own advantages and drawbacks. For instance Amorphous Silicon (a-Si) cells are well-understood since they are trimmed-down version of the traditional silicon-wafer cells. They are best for smaller applications and less than ideal for larger scale applications, due to significant degradation in their power output when exposed to sun. The newest generation of thin-film solar cells uses thin layers of either Cadmium Telluride (CdTe), Copper Indium Selenide (CIS) or Copper Indium Gallium Deselenide (CIGS) instead of silicon that is used in traditional solar cell.


Wafer-based Crystalline-Silicone technology and thin film technology could be compared from a variety of angles. For example, traditional crystalline-silicon based solar panels require a complex and time-consuming manufacturing process that drives up their per-watt cost. On the other hand, non-silicon thin-film solar cells are much easier to manufacture, and therefore less costly.


As discussed earlier c-Si cells enjoy high efficiency, high stability, and high reliability. Other benefits include lower installation cost and high resistance to heat. The c-Si panels also withstand the severe conditions associated with space travel. Longevity is another plus and when it comes to recycling, silicon seems to be more environmentally friendly. On the downside, c-Si cells have higher initial costs and considered to be more expensive than other solar components. Moreover, c-Si modules are very fragile and need a firm mounting structure. They also have lower absorption coefficient. On the other hand, thin-film cells are more flexible and easier to handle since they are available in thin wafer sheets. Thin-film cells are less expensive, but with
 
lower efficiency which can offset the price advantage. Thin-film technologies may not be considered for larger applications since they have more complex structure, require more space and unique installation skills.


Researchers in solar PV industry tend to look for ways to improve the efficiency and cost- effectiveness of solar PV cells. Concentrating Photovoltaics (CPV) which are mostly used in larger utility-grade applications, Organic Solar Cells and Advanced Inorganic Thin Films are some of the emerging and novel solar PV technologies that are under investigation with a potential for higher efficiency and lower cost than c-Si and thin ﬁlms.


Solar PV Module Performance Measurements: The performance of a solar PV module is

measured with peak watt ratings (Wp or kWp). A set of laboratory testes called Standard Test Conditions (STC) create uniform test conditions which make it possible to conduct uniform comparisons of photovoltaic modules by different manufacturers. These conditions define performance at an incident sunlight of 1000 W/m², a cell temperature of 25°C (77°F) and an air mass (atmospheric density) of 1.5 kg/m3. However, STC conditions are not typical in the real world. When operating in the field, solar PV modules typically operate at higher temperatures and at somewhat lower insolation conditions. In order to determine the power output of the solar cell, it is important to determine the expected operating temperature of the PV module.
Therefore, a different procedure, called Normal Operating Cell Temperature (NOCT), has been adopted. NOCT incorporates more reality into conditions by assuming 800 watts per square meter of sunlight irradiance, an average of 20°C (68°F) air temperature and an average wind velocity of 1 meter per second, with the back side of the solar panel fully open. The results of
 
STC and NOCT could be obtained from the technical specification sheet for each type of solar PV modules or from the manufacturers. This information are then used in solar PV system sizing calculations.


Solar PV Module Degradation: The performance of a solar PV module decreases over time. The

manufacturing processes, quality of the materials used, even assembling and packaging of a module can impact the rate of this degradation. Climate and environmental effects are another factor. A regular maintenance and cleaning plan may result in lower rate of degradation.
However, the rate of degradation is mainly a function of PV module’s characteristics.


Modules Cost and Efficiency: Assuming that maximizing solar electricity generation for the

lowest cost is a priority, then it would be best to consider the cost effectiveness of a solar module regardless of its technology and by scrutinizing its cost per rated output. However, the less expensive modules are often less efficient too and require larger areas to produce the same nominal power. Although some solar PV panels may be more expensive, but may also be more easily installed and thus less expensive overall. Generally speaking, solar PV panels may be the most expensive components of a solar PV system, but the costs of other components, installation, upgrades to existing network, cost of applicable permits and cost of the maintenance and repairs should also be considered when estimating the overall cost of a solar PV project. Eventually, a life cycle cost analysis (LCCA) for the solar PV system –as a whole-would be required to determine project payback and ROI.


Certifications: There are internationally accepted standards for solar PV modules that are issued
 
by International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). Additionally, there may be other standards accepted in a region. For instance, in the United States, Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL) issues the product safety testing certification. UL is a Nationally Recognized Testing laboratory (NRTL) and certification by NRTL for solar PV modules is mandatory in US. In Canada all solar PV modules must conform to Canadian Standards Associations (CSA) relevant standards.
Similar standards regulate issues related to health, safety and environmental requirements of such products in the European Union.


Mounting Systems: As mentioned earlier in this chapter, mounting of solar modules on a

structure is a must in order to provide the panels with the protection and structural support they need. These systems are usually designed according to site specifications such as location, solar irradiance, available space and cost. Depending on the application, location and size of a project, these systems may be designed by a structural engineer whose designs will be used by a racking company to create the racking structure for the modules. The structural engineer would also need to consult the racking manufacturers for loading issues depending on each application and their specific needs.


Sizing of a Solar PV System: In general, solar PV modules are connected together and form

arrays to meet various energy needs. The solar arrays are then connected to a power conversion system that converts the Direct Current (DC) generated by the solar PV arrays into Alternating Current. As previously described, there are two main applications for interconnecting distributed generation systems. They are either Grid-connected (grid-tied) systems or Off-grid/Islanded (stand-alone) systems. Both could also include battery energy storage backup systems.
 
Applications that could function while connected to the grid, as well as detached from it, are called grid-interactive systems. A solar PV system should be sized and designed in such a way that meets the specific requirements of each application. For instance, in off-grid applications, in order to meet the load demands during the lower solar availability, the solar PV arrays (and associated battery banks) must be carefully sized. In grid-connected applications, the existence of bulk utility power eliminates the need to closely match the system size with the year-round electrical loads. However there are other considerations that must be taken into account when designing a grid-tied application.


In summary, sizing of grid-connected PV systems can be approached in a number of ways depending on project requirements. For instance, for an urban residential solar PV system, the objective may be offsetting household’s annual electricity consumption, or reducing family’s carbon footprint by using alternative and renewable energy sources. Or re-shingling a south- facing roof with solar PV roofing tiles, as well as taking advantage of available unshaded roof area.


Estimate the Usage: It’s always beneficial to determine the amount of energy a site (i.e. a

residential, commercial, industrial or institutional building) consume over a year. Then depending on the application (grid-tied or isolated from the grid) and what fraction of energy consumption is desired to be offset with a solar PV system, the usage can be determined. There are a number of ways that usage can be estimated or calculated. One is to conduct a load study. For example, for a residential application, this load study could be completing a simple electric load work sheet. This can be used to list all the appliances and their power consumptions; and
 
calculate how much power they use each day. Additionally, the energy consumed by each household load -i.e. kitchen appliances- can also be measured using metering devices (watt-hour meters). These devices measure the energy used by loads plugged directly into them, as opposed to in-home energy use displays, which display the aggregate energy used by an entire household. For more complex projects such as large commercial or industrial applications, more comprehensive studies and measurements are required.


Production Modeling: The information collected from various stages of a project is used to

estimate the energy production for a solar PV system. Production modeling helps designers compare the performance and cost of different layouts and equipment. It is done to verify that solar PV system is able to generate the power that is estimated, the financial returns and to help justify the investment. The modeling may be done by a professional to verify the design work, commissioning and the operation of the system. The PV potential (kWh/kW) is a simple estimate of how much alternating current electricity (in kilowatt-hours) on average a solar PV system is expected to generate over its lifetime. This only applies to typical grid-connected solar PV systems without battery storage and is calculated for per unit of PV system rated DC power (in kW) at Standard Test Conditions (STC).


As a simple example, if the annual PV potential at a given location is 1000 kWh/kW, this indicates that for a system with a rated STC power of 4 kW, annual electricity production should be approximately 1000 kWh/kW*4 kW=4000 kWh. There are number of tools which may be used to assist with such calculations. For example, to evaluate the PV generation potential across Canada, Natural Resources Canada has developed a tool, called the “photovoltaic potential and
 
solar resource maps of Canada”, which can help professionals estimate solar PV electricity production for over 3500 Canadian municipalities and illustrate monthly and annual electricity generation per kilowatt of an installed solar PV system.


Incentives: Government and utility incentives may exist for various applications. This should

also be considered when exploring the pros and cons of a solar PV system.

As pointed out previously, solar panels are one of the main components of a solar photovoltaic system. But how a specific technology is selected also depends on other factors as well. For instance the amount of energy that’s needed, site location and available space, climate, whether the system is connected to the utility grid in an urban area or isolated (i.e. a remote island) or for a mobile site (i.e. military applications), cost, and other project specific requirements. The next sections describe some considerations required to be taken into account when designing a solar PV system.


Design and Construction: As discussed earlier in this chapter, the design stage of a project may

include the selection of solar PV modules, preparation and submission of permit applications, selecting and ranking contractors, finalizing tender documents, etc. Some of these activities, such as enquiring permits and approvals from various authorities may take a considerable amount of time and should be started earlier in a project timeline.


Designing a Solar PV System: Assuming successful completion of the preceding tasks, the

design stages of a solar PV system starts with corroboration of known constraints. For instance, the solar PV modules- in a fixed tilt angle- have to be placed on a south-facing structure, with a
 
tilt from the horizontal axis, roughly equal to the local latitude. A solar PV system may be required to either assist, offset or completely eliminate the need for utility supplied power. In that case, to determine the size of the system certain parameters need to be considered, e.g. the energy consumption per day in kWh averaged over one year; the number of Peak Sun Hours (PSH) per day; the ratio of STC power to real power; efficiency of the inverter; system losses; and losses due to solar PV panel degradation. In a well-designed system overall system losses vary between 8% and 2%. Along with solar PV system sizing, module layout needs to be specified. Certain layouts may allow for more efficient use of space. Other consideration may include snow clearing, presence of other components, such as HVAC units, on a roof, and compliance with fire safety codes and ease of installation.


Balance- of -System Selection and Considerations: The balance-of-system (BOS) normally

refers to the other components of a solar PV system other than solar photovoltaic panels. Along with sizing of solar PV array, the size of the required electrical components, such as power conditioning systems, inverters, conductors, disconnect means and circuit breakers will have to be determined to maximize the performance of the system. Other considerations may include: space requirements, expansion of the system in the future and the use of harsh weather rated components.
Inverter: Where required the DC power generated by a solar PV plant is controverted into alternating current.

This is done by a solid state electronic device called inverter. The alternating current power from inverter is then suitable for interconnection with utility grid or servicing local alternating current loads. Some inverters use techniques such as MPPT (Maximum Power Point Tracking) that enables them to maximize the power output of a solar PV plant. No single inverter suits all applications. For instance, inverters
 
in grid-tied mode include the “anti-islanding“ mechanism and must automatically shut down and disconnect from the utility grid in case of loss of grid power, or when it deviates from the “spec”. These types of inverters periodically test the grid, and if conditions are restored in compliance with the spec for an uninterrupted period, then the equipment would re-synchronize and connect back to the grid. A number of standards exist to ensure a higher level of safety, and quality of performance of inverters. In terms of conforming to the standards, these requirements depend on the location of the project and the specific type of inverter used in a project. In Europe, inverters must be CE compliant, whereas in U.S all grid-tied systems that use inverters and charge controllers must pass the UL 1741 test standards and have the applicable labels. In Canada, these inverters must conform and be certified to CSA 22.2 No.107.1 standard.



Project Permits and Approvals: As mentioned, solar PV installations have to be compliant with a

wide variety of national, provincial and municipal codes and standards. Such standards cover a wide range of parameters including safety, security and environmental concerns.


Power Quality/Grid Code Compliance: As mentioned, grid-connected PV systems are connected

to the utility company at the point of common coupling or point of delivery. To ensure safe interactions between customer-owned assets and utility-owned co-generation assets, interconnection codes need to be adhered to. Whether a distributed generator intend to sell the power back to the utility, synchronize with the utility, or temporarily transfer load to/from standby generation to/from utility, there are specific requirements which need to be met.
Power quality and grid code requirements vary depending on the location and the country. As such, it would be difficult to provide universal guidelines which could govern such interactions.
 
In Canada, Utilities assist in determining the most appropriate interconnection process, depending on the site location and proposed power output of the generator. Each utility conducts their own set of investigation and review to ensure the proposed customer-owned generator is able to be connected to the utility network, and to assess its impact on their systems and assets. Utility’s interconnection review is a detailed evaluation of the impact of a proposed project on the reliability of the utility grid. The impact review may include the estimated cost for equipment, engineering, procurement and construction work which may be required to support the IPP’s assets.


Upon successful completion of the review process, an interconnection agreement may be concluded between the utility and the IPP, which identifies each party’s roles and responsibilities. For instance, the IPP may be required to install code-compliant equipment (e.g. electrical, safety, building, etc), while the utility agrees to purchase the electricity from the IPP at pre-defined rates.


National and Local Electrical Codes: Designers for solar PV projects should familiarize

themselves with electrical codes. All line diagrams must be created in accordance with standards as specified in national and local electrical codes. All calculations such as evaluation of open circuit voltages, short circuit analysis, and the like, should also be conducted in full compliance with all nationally, provisionally and municipally imposed codes and standards.


Installation of Solar PV Systems: Solar PV modules should be installed by qualified installers

with adequate solar installation experience, in full compliance with the applicable codes. Given
 
the tight tolerances of such modules, and their sensitivity to improper storage, transportation, unpacking and installation, significant personal injury and equipment damage could result from inadequate care and mis-handling.


System Testing and Commissioning: The objective of Site Acceptance Testing (SAT) process is

to review, verify, and document that the project design and construction meet project requirements, and to develop a set of baseline test results for comparison in future testing to identify equipment degradation. Commissioning activities ensure a fully functional system that is installed to applicable codes and to acceptable industry practices and standards. It verifies that the system has been proven to meet all of the design criteria, functional specifications and operational requirements and operates consistently at acceptable efficiencies and with the intended performance under expected conditions.


Inspection and Maintenance Plan: In general, solar PV plants have low maintenance and

servicing requirements. However, suitable maintenance plan is essential to optimize energy production and maximize the life of the system. Inspection and maintenance plans should be designed considering all equipment installed to form a solar PV system.


Some of the above mentioned concepts could be further elaborated within the context of a Case Study. Here, we will review BCIT’s Energy OASIS project as the underlying application for what has been discussed so far.


BCIT’s Energy OASIS Project- A Case Study: Energy OASIS is a grid-interactive system,
 
consisting of a number of subsystems; a 250 kW solar photovoltaic parking canopy system; a 500 kWh battery energy storage system (BESS); balance-of-system equipment –including a 280 kW inverter-and loads. The purpose of the OASIS solar PV system is to locally generate power and provide energy to the battery energy storage system (BESS), and/or BCIT internal power distribution network and also support microgrid loads. This section describes the steps taken in various stages for the design, installation and commissioning of OASIS solar PV system.


OASIS Feasibility Study: Real-estate and weight was a concern (which often is with solar

panels). Concerns with the weight of the installations disqualified the initial choice of roof-top areas of most of BCIT buildings, which (due to their age) could not accommodate such additional weights without significant investments in structural reinforcements. The choice were then focused on the real-estate available on the campus in terms of walk-ways and parking lots. Nevertheless, since real-estate across the campus was mostly at a premium, and given their surface area requirement, Mono Crystalline panels appeared to be the best option to use. Further studies showed that c-Si were the most suitable technology to employ in the prevalent environment and geographical conditions of the lower mainland of British Columbia.
Furthermore, given the shading concerns with tall buildings and vegetation around most of parking spaces on the campus, the largest parking lot with relatively fewer buildings and vegetation were chosen as the site of the parking canopy installation [5, 6].


Moreover, the lifespan of a c-Si cell is claimed to be about twenty-five years, making them long term investment. However, these panels were extremely fragile. That meant a rigid mounting system was needed; as such several design options for the superstructure were investigated; 1)
 
pre-engineered carport style installations; 2) free standing, column supported installations on individual footings; and 3) moment-frame installations oriented either north-south, or east-west or with a horizontal slope. A geotechnical assessment for the proposed location was carried out. The information resulting from this assessment, was later used in the detailed design of the superstructure for the solar canopies. The solar PV site had to be located in close proximity to the electrical distribution substation, power conversion system and battery storage system to reduce voltage drops and costs of installation. The superstructure system included 5 year service life.


Initial Planning: The PV array subsystem was initially planned to be a 290 kW DC system.

Preliminary design included 968 solar PV modules to achieve 290 kW DC power generation capacity. Further reviews were conducted to finalize the design of this system. Several Initial layouts for the PV subsystem were designed, among them solar canopies, solar trees, etc. Initial cost estimates showed that, given the geographical location of the installation, parking canopies were the most cost-effective option.


Detailed Design and Specifications: As mentioned, carport structures were chosen as the most

cost-effective option for this project. Design of such structures had to incorporate rainwater and runoff collection, as well as bird dropping control. The carport system was chosen to be modular in structure and customizable to fit the target parking areas. Configuration of the module arrangement were optimized for the spatial cut out of the parking area, as well as for the local boundary conditions (such as ground conditions, wind loads and snow loads). This enabled the design to achieve project’s cost target, while complying with all applicable structural requirements. Moreover, the choice for foundation design was determined to be cast-in-place.
 
The design calculations were provided by the technology providers. Sizing dimensions were met in every case in order to guarantee structural safety of the carport. The reinforcement plans were also created according to structural regulations.


Solar PV Modules: The final design has 814 x 305w modules, grouped in strings of 11, capable

of generating approximately 250 kW DC. All other electrical components of the system were carefully selected and designed for this application. The power conversion system included bi- directional DC/DC converters -for the purpose of charging and discharging the battery energy storage system-, a solar DC/DC converter, four-quadrant bi-directional grid-tied inverter and all the required protection and control. There were also a large amount of electrical work such as trenching & cabling between solar PV parking canopies and the power conversion system for data and power cabling and routing.


Solar Photovoltaic Modules Specification: Energy OASIS solar PV modules are designed and

certified to be universally compliant with North American photovoltaic standards, as well as CSA standards. The mono crystalline silicon modules selected for this project have linear output power of 305W for 25 years. The degradation is expected to be less than 3% of their maximum power in 1st year. Less than 0.7% of Pmax per year degradation in subsequent years is expected. Their operating temperature is -20°C to +45°C. Moreover, the photovoltaic modules consist of aluminum framed glass/foil laminates with interconnected crystalline silicon solar cells, junction box, and double insulated wires terminated in touch safe specific PV DC-connectors.
 
on a series of concrete (cast-in-place) foundations. The cast-in-place foundation is essentially made up of the base plate and the base pedestal. The base plate laid below the frost line as per supplier’s mounting instructions. The base pedestal also serves as impact protection. The cast-in- place foundations were laid by BCIT and the consultant company. The dimension and position of the anchors for the carports were provided by the supplier. The anchors were then thoroughly encased in concrete. Eventually, 814 of these solar PV modules were installed and structured as two solar PV canopies in one of BCIT Burnaby campus parking areas. These two parking canopies, shown in Fig 4.2, cover approximately 120 car stalls in an area of 1664 m2.

either the Electrical Engineer of the Record (EER), or consulting engineers or BCIT personnel. A test report was delivered to BCIT after completion of the on-site tests. The purpose of Site Acceptance Testing (SAT) for the solar photovoltaic system was to provide a guide for the commissioning of the system, up to the power conversion system, and to provide the format for tracking and recording results. The materials and information resulting from the SAT process were also included. A commissioning plan was specifically developed for the Energy OASIS PV array. The processes and procedures outlined in SAT document had been tailored to meet the scope of this project as it pertained to the solar PV array.


Project Approvals: The approvals and permits secured by the OASIS project included- but not

limited to -the City of Burnaby for the electrical installation and operation, as well as the structural approval for the solar canopies. An agreement was also reached between BCIT and BC Hydro for the interconnection of the system to BC Hydro’s distribution network, which stipulated OASIS to be responsible for the design and installation, and maintaining operation, and maintenance of all equipment, station and distribution line facilities from the PCC to the OASIS’s generation facility. The OASIS also obtained all regulatory approvals, including environmental assessment approvals for the construction and operation of its facilities. OASIS submitted all specifications of its facilities and detailed plans to BC Hydro for review prior to receiving permission to connect to BC Hydro.


Interconnection with Utility: BC Hydro is the third largest electric utility in Canada which

serves customers in an area containing over 94% of British Columbia's population. As mentioned, being a grid-interactive system, OASIS is capable of operating in parallel with, as
 
well as completely isolated from BC Hydro. Interconnection of such a system with the utility is covered under BC Hydro’s load displacement program and was required to meet the technical requirements of “35 KV and below Interconnections requirements for Power Generators”.[7] These requirements aim to ensure safe isolation for maintenance, islanding, grid-tied operation, protection, fail safe, transient stability and harmonics propagation. These requirements and the tests/analysis conducted to prove full compliance with these requirements were subsequently captured in an “Interconnection agreement” document concluded by relevant stakeholders. This section provides an overview of OASIS project, using a highly simplified single line diagram of the whole system as shown in Fig 4.3. [8]

As illustrated in figure 4.3, Energy OASIS is connected to the BC Hydro system through a three
 
phase, 4-quadrant, bi-directional inverter. The system is connected to one of the BCIT's existing substations, which in turn is connected to the BC Hydro network. The point of common coupling is one of BCIT’s existing receiving stations. It’s located on the campus and connects to a 12.5 kV BC Hydro overhead line. In order to meet BC Hydro’s “35 KV and below Interconnections requirements for Power Generators” OASIS installed a grid-connected inverter compliant with CSA 22.2 No.107.1 standard. Automatic synchronization to the grid is done by inverter control and protection system. Additionally, the secondary anti-islanding protection is also provided by this inverter. Moreover, OASIS upgraded one of BCIT’s existing substations and installed a controllable-breaker on its feeder. The operation of this breaker is controlled by a multi- functional protection relay, featuring up to 20 flexible protection functions. OASIS passive islanding protection is provided by the power quality elements (over/under voltage and under/over frequency) within this multi-function protection relay. OASIS also designed and put in place a reverse interlock system with the feeder protection relay in PCC. This system comprises of both hardwired copper and IEC-61850 network GOOSE messaging communication medium.


Project Completion: Final sign-off process of OASIS verified that the OASIS’s power

generation facility was designed, constructed and tested in accordance with the requirements stated in the BC Hydro’s requirements, in terms of being safe for BC Hydro employees and agents, for BC Hydro customers and for the general public, at all times. OASIS met BC Hydro’s operating, revenue metering and protection requirements, and was consistent with the required regulatory agencies and authorities’ codes and standards, such as the British Columbia Utilities Commission (BCUC) and the Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC).
 


Inspection and Maintenance Plan: Regular cleaning is recommended by for the solar PV

modules for energy OASIS project. The inspection of the BOS is also included in BCIT’s overall annual electrical maintenance and service plan.


Demonstration and knowledge Dissemination: Since its inception, OASIS has been the focus of

numerous demonstration and knowledge-transfer activities for various national and international research and educational institutes and universities. Several papers and educational materials & professional practice seminars have been developed to address more advanced solar PV system designs. The system is an excellent case study for solar PV installations in BC, and can be used to support academic and professional courses, as well as a tool for public awareness and education of renewable energy technologies and their applications.


4.2.	Wind Installations

Ancient civilizations have tapped the power of wind energy for a variety of different purposes; from powering their sailing vessels to grinding grains and pumping water for irrigation. Today, generating electricity from wind is one of the fastest growing methods of energy generation in the world. Wind turbines convert kinetic energy from moving air into electricity. The electricity so generated can be used, stored or fed into the electricity grid. By the end of 2012 there were more than 225,000 wind turbines operating around the world in about 80 countries. Predictions indicate that the share of wind energy in total US electricity generation may grow from 6% today to 20% by 2030 [9]. Similar publicly available data indicate that in 2012, over 3750 wind turbines generate electricity in 170 wind farms across the country for a total installed capacity of
 
6201 Mega Watts, compared with only 60 wind turbines, 8 wind farms and 23 Mega Watts in 1997 10].


This section begins with a review of wind power technologies and applications. It explores technical considerations involved in the selection and integration of wind systems. Then a case study will be described: the vertical axis wind turbine at BCIT. The requirements and specifications of that system will be reviewed. This includes the objectives, design requirements and equipment selection considerations.


Technology Fundamentals: A typical wind turbine consists of blades, nacelle (generator and

gearbox), tower and the base. The spinning blades are attached to the generator through a series of gears. Depending on the type of the generator, the electricity may be produced at a varying frequency which must be corrected to 60 cycles per seconds before it could be used. The tower supports the structure of the turbine and may be made from tubular steel, concrete, or steel lattice. Depending on the type and size of a turbine, the foundation or base maybe made of concrete reinforced with steel bars. A turbine may also include an anemometer, brake, controller, low and high speed shafts, a pitch system, rotor, a wind vane, a yaw motor and drive [11, 12].


Scale of Wind Power: Wind turbines are classified by their size, or capacity; in other words by

the amount of electricity they can produce; small turbines at less than 100 KW; medium turbines between 100 KW and 500 KW; large turbines from 500 KW to 5 MW. Small wind turbines could be used in both grid-connected and off-grid applications. However, they are usually used for homes, farms, and remote sites, where grid electricity is not available. Medium size wind
 
turbines are often used for microgrids or in hybrid systems together with diesel generators for remote community electrification. Large wind turbines are employed by utility companies, or Independent Power producers (IPP), to generate bulk energy at utility transmission level [11].


Types of Wind Turbines: The blades of wind turbine are installed perpendicularly to the rotating

axis, and form a certain angel.Wind turbines exist in two basic varieties: Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines (HAWT) and Vertical Axis Wind Turbines (VAWT). Depending on available wind resources, requiring low-speed or high-speed wind turbine; the number of the blades changes.


Planning a Wind Project: Site suitability, wind speed, tower type and height, and rotor diameter

are only a few factors to name when planning a wind project.


Site Qualification: Numerous considerations have to be taken into account when selecting a site

for a wind turbine (or wind farm). Site must be suitable for steady wind flow. Wind consistency is an important consideration for the design of wind power systems. A suitable location is a site with fewer obstructions for wind flow. There are useful tools which could be used to assess site suitability for wind projects. For example, Environment Canada's Wind Energy Atlas web site includes a meteorological tool which could be used to qualify wind sites in Canada. In the US, NREL's Geospatial Data Science Team offers both a national wind resource assessment of the United States and a high-resolution wind data. Moreover, the target location should contain no impediment to assembling and erecting wind towers.


Approvals and Permits: To mitigate the concerns associated with the development of wind
 
turbines, including safety, audio noise and land use, many jurisdictions across North America have developed codes and guidelines. For instance, turbines have to keep a minimum distance with built-up areas, residences, natural features and infrastructure. Another concern is the interconnection of a wind project with the utility grid. Wind co-gen systems may operate in parallel with the utility grid (grid-connected). For this purpose utilities have specific requirements which aim to ensure safe isolation for maintenance, islanding, grid-tied operation, protection, fail safe, transient stability and harmonics propagation.


Economics of a wind project: Detailed feasibility studies are required to determine whether the

wind resource in a certain area makes a wind system economical. By knowing kWh/per year produced by a wind turbine and local electricity costs per KWh, the savings can be calculated. Designers also need to determine electricity needs for any given site by looking at monthly or yearly electricity usage. Additionally, the cost of a turbine, tower, installation costs, costs of permits and approvals required for this installation, costs for the maintenance and repair of the system should be taken into account. There may be other costs associated with specific projects. Many governments and utilities offer incentive programs for renewables that positively affect the return on investment.


Power of the Wind and Measuring Electrical Production: As discussed, many parameters impact

the productivity of a wind turbine, measured as the amount of electricity in KWh produced over the course of a year in a specific wind resource. The amount of electricity a wind turbine generates in a year is called AEP (annual energy production). AEP is mainly based on the wind power available for a turbine to capture and convert to electricity, determined by the size of the
 
rotors (blades and hub), speed of wind at specific height, air density and temperature and turbulences. A simple formula often used to estimate the wind power in an area is:
w = ½* ρ *A* v3 where w is power, ρ is air density, A is the rotor area, and v is the wind speed.


Another consideration is the efficiency of a wind turbine based on two factors: wind utilization ratio and generator efficiency. Publicly available data reveals that in wind turbine industry a ratio of 0.45 is a good number to consider for the wind utilization ratio. For generator efficiency it varies from 75% to 85%.


Horizontal Axis or Vertical Axis Wind Turbine: The choice between a HAWT and VAWT is

not often straightforward. Factors such as gear box, blade rotation space, noise, environmental impacts (such as effect on birds), power generation efficiency, power curve, starting wind speed, wind cut-off speed, rotating speed, failure rate, etc have to be taken into account.
For instance VAWT do not require a gear box. This is one less mechanical part that needs to be considered in inspection and maintenance plan. VAWT starts producing power in lower wind speeds compared to a HAWT. The ratio of the utilization of the wind power of a VAWT is higher than HAWT. The structure of a VAWT is not as complicated as the one for HAWT. On the other hand the technology of the horizontal axis wind turbine is more mature.


Case Study: BCIT’s Vertical Axis Wind Turbine:



BCIT’s Smart Microgrid includes a 5 kW wind turbine at BCIT’s smart demonstration home shown in Fig 4.4.
 







The purpose of this project was to connect a vertical axis wind turbine (VAWT) to the BCIT’s net-zero home; to monitor electrical generation of the wind turbine; and integrate this generation data into BCIT’s Energy Management System (EMS). Of particular interest for the researchers were the integration issues of wind energy into BCIT Microgrid at grid-connected and off-grid scenarios.
 
Site Study: The geotechnical study analyzed soil composition of the target location to determine

its structural stability to accommodate the structure for the VAWT by conducting a sub-surface investigation, which was needed to finalize the design and construction of this new structure.
Technical specifications: The turbine is designed to self-start with wind speeds of 2.1 meters per

second. The blades are mounted on a 50 foot custom designed monopole that can be lowered, using a portable hydraulic power pack, for maintenance or training purposes. The turbine interfaces with a variable power, high frequency inverter developed specifically for the wind power market. The inverter enables wind turbine data to be captured, stored, and published to BCIT’s custom developed web-based Energy Management System, providing users with integrated data communications, data collection and analysis capability.
Interconnection with the utility grid: Provisions are in place by the local utility company for

distribution-connected customers to connect a small energy source (less than 100kW) to utility’s distribution system to offset their load and participate in the Net Metering program. It is not expected that VAWT exports power to the grid because of the size of turbine (5kW) and is considered to be a load displacement component only. As such, the technical interconnection requirements for connecting small generators to the distribution system applies. In that regard, the utility requires the inverter for this wind turbine to not only meet applicable codes, but also contain provisions to safely disconnect from the grid, if and when required. Moreover, the applicable anti-islanding code requires the inverter to cease energizing the distribution system within 0.1 seconds upon loss of the grid supply. This is critical for the safety of electrical workers and the public. Wind turbine inverter- as a grid-dependent inverter- is designed to only energize when the grid supply is present and cannot operate in stand-alone (islanded) mode.
 
Detailed interconnection requirements between Co-gens and the grid will be discussed in the next section. Figure 4.5 depicts a highly simplified one-line diagram for this installation.





4.3.	Power Conversion System:

As discussed before, the battery energy storage and solar photovoltaic mediums are predominantly direct current (DC) systems in nature. To interface such systems with the present electric utility grid, the energy must be converted to a standard alternating current and regulated through a conversion system. This requires bi-directional conversion from alternating current to DC and DC to alternating current, performed by Power Conversion System (PCS).


Overview of Energy OASIS’s PCS: The Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) and solar PV

subsystems are integrated thru a high-efficiency power conversion system which converts between alternating current and DC to provide real and reactive power, as well as bidirectional energy flow to
 
the grid and to the BESS [13]. The power conversion system (PCS) for the Energy OASIS project consists of DC inputs for battery connections, DC input for solar PV connection, an integrated 4-quadrant bidirectional inverter which in turn provides isolated alternating current output for loads – through an integral isolation transformer- and a connection to the grid. The Integrated bidirectional inverter complies with IEEE 519 and IEEE 1547 requirements including anti- islanding provisions.
The inverter within the PCS supports two modes of operation: Grid-tied (operating in parallel with the utility grid) and Islanded mode (stand-alone and isolated from the utility grid). It is also designed to support both the battery energy storage subsystem and solar PV arrays with integrated maximum power point tracking (MPPT) scheme. This bi-directional inverter is specifically designed for grid-tied battery energy storage systems and solar interconnection. The PCS for Energy OASIS, shown in Fig 4.6, manages multiple distributed energy resources on the same distribution network including optimal dispatch and islanding.
 

Modes of operations: The bi-directional inverter inside the PCS, operates in two distinct modes:

Grid-tied and Stand-alone. There are also a number of minor sub-modes in both grid-connected and stand-alone modes; for instance PCS is capable of providing power from only batteries or solar PV system or both. In Grid-tied mode, the control is real power command and reactive power command, issued by Energy OASIS control system. The inverter can also take analog and digital power command inputs set by the user. In the stand-alone mode of operation, the inverter controls the voltage and frequency. In grid-tied mode- after a grid fault (voltage or frequency excursion) - the system will disconnect from the grid and switch over to islanded mode, keeping the microgrid load powered with minimal transfer transient. Upon grid voltage restoration, the inverter synchronizes its output to match the grid voltage and frequency prior to transferring back to the grid. The inverter within the PCS can also transfer between grid and stand-alone
 
operation as commanded at any time during operation (intentional islanding).The control circuit uses advanced Digital Signal Processing (DSP) to operate, monitor and protect the PCS.


System Operational Features: In grid-connected mode, the inverter attempts to supply

continuous power at rates up to 110% and down to 88% of the nominal line voltage. The system automatically synchronizes to the alternating current line. Conditions of line faults in grid-connected mode are: Over-voltage (OV), Under-Voltage (UV), Under-frequency (UF) and Over-frequency (OF).
If any of these conditions occur beyond the allowed time period, the unit is automatically disconnected from the line and enters into standalone operation. In Stand-alone mode, the inverter operates as an alternating current voltage controlled voltage-source unit. The inverter adjusts the voltage and frequency to the microgrid load per the set voltage and frequency adjustment command. The default output follows nominal system rating- i.e. 480 VAC at 60 Hz for Energy OASIS system. The set voltage and frequency adjustments would be applied on top of this.
Voltage and frequency accuracy are within +/-1% of rated. Conditions of line faults in islanded/stand-alone mode are: Over-voltage (OV), Under-Voltage (UV), Under-frequency (UF) and, over-frequency (OF).


4.4	Applicable Standards


In Canada, all electrical and gas powered products must be certified for their intended use. These products shall meet the safety and performance requirements of the codes and standards which they are certified to. This allows for consistency in manufacturing and installation practices.
With growing number of distributed generations in smaller scales, such as residential and commercial solar photovoltaic systems, wind turbines, micro Hydro generations, fuel cell
 
technologies and combined heat and power (CHP) units, there is a need for national guidelines and policies for connecting these systems to public electricity grid. This section summarizes the safety and power quality standards and related codes that Canadian provinces and territories have already employed, along with those in international community that can serve as reference for Canada.


Similarly, most jurisdictions across the world have their own set of codes and standards that apply to a complete DG system. Requirements that exists for the equipment, protection, power quality, commissioning and testing and operation and maintenance of DG systems that are connected to utility grids.


Nevertheless, and given the fact that protection, power quality and grid code, equipment selection, testing and commissioning, operating and maintenance requirements vary depending on the location/country, it is not possible to provide guidelines that are applicable universally.


As discussed, distributed generation systems are designed as either grid-connected, or isolated from the grid. Grid-connected systems are connected to the utility company at the point of common coupling or point of delivery. Majority of the utilities offer interconnection services to connect an independent power producer (IPP) to their distribution network. There are specific requirements for DGs, which intend to sell power back to a utility, or synchronize to the grid, or temporarily transfer load to/from standby generation to/from utility.


In Canada, utilities assist in determining the most appropriate interconnection process, depending
 
on the site location and the proposed output power of the generator. Interconnection requests are reviewed by utility to ensure the proposed generator is safe to be interconnected with their network, and also assess the impact of the proposed generator on utility’s systems and facilities. This process would also enable DG owners gain a better understanding of the risks and costs involved in interconnecting such a system with the larger grid. Details of the interconnection review process will be discussed in chapter 8.

Once all studies are completed, an interconnection agreement will be negotiated by both utility and the distributed generation plant. The agreement determines rules and responsibilities of each party, as well as applicable standards and provisions which need to be in place in order for the DG power plant and the main grid to be safely interconnected.
