5.	Electrical Storage System	

This chapter explores the role of an electrical energy storage system in a microgrid, and technical issues in the selection and integration of storage technology. The chapter begins with a brief overview of use cases for energy storage in a microgrid; how storage can be used when the microgrid is operating off-grid (islanded) and how it can be used when the microgrid is operating connected and in parallel with the larger power grid.


Next, broader technological requirements and trade-offs for energy storage will be discussed, by way of exploring several storage technology options. Then a case study will be described; the battery energy storage system (BESS) of the Energy OASIS microgrid at BCIT. The requirements and specifications of that system will be reviewed, including physical and safety considerations and electrical specifications. Microgrid storage control design and controls and monitoring integration will be discussed. The chapter will conclude with some lessons learned during the design, integration, and testing of the OASIS microgrid BESS.


A microgrid which incorporates intermittent renewable sources of generation, such as photovoltaic and wind, requires an energy storage system (ESS), to perform several interrelated functions in the microgrid power system.


a)	ESS when the microgrid is islanded (off-grid)

Load-matching (Generation leveling and time-shifting): Over the course of a day or several days,

the ESS is used to time-shift the energy generated by intermittent renewables so that power is available to microgrid loads when the loads demand the power. For example, demand may peak
 
in the morning and afternoon, while PV generation peaks at noon and wind generation peaks in the middle of the night. The ESS should be controlled to have storage capacity headroom at the right time so that it can be charged to full state-of-charge with the excess PV or wind power.


Then the discharge of the ESS may match the evening and early morning peak demand. Consider a remote community off-grid microgrid seeking to minimize use of fossil-fuel backup generator power. Levelling and time-shifting of local renewable generation is key, since without it, renewable energy will often be wasted due to low demand, and polluting and costly backup generators will be needed for more energy and longer periods, when demand exceeds renewable generation.


Optimally operating diesel generation alongside renewables: If an off-grid microgrid must rely

on diesel or similar generators when renewable generation is insufficient, but also has significant intermittent renewable generation capacity, then the renewable generation must be controlled whenever it is generating in parallel with the diesel generator(s). It is inefficient and damaging to operate diesel generators at low power compared to their rated electrical power output, and inefficient and damaging to start and stop them frequently. An ESS can be charge/discharge controlled so it acts as a buffer to accept power from varying renewable generation while the generators are running, so that the generators see stable load that is in their high-power operating range.


Voltage and frequency control: If a microgrid is islanded (off-grid), and is currently running a

throttleable generator, then the generator has a controller which matches generator AC power
 
output to varying load (net of varying renewable generation). The generator’s controller monitors and counteracts frequency or voltage swings in the microgrid by varying fuel supply to the generator. But a key goal of a renewable-heavy microgrid is to reduce or eliminate the operating time of fossil fuel generators. When the controllable generator is not operating, then the ESS must be used as the source of power to rapidly match load increases or renewable generation drops and avoid voltage drop, or conversely, as the sink of power to rapidly match intermittent renewable generation increases or load cutoffs and avoid overvoltage conditions in the microgrid. As well any direct current / alternating current inverter operating without an external frequency reference in the off-grid microgrid must be able to rely on the energy storage system as a flexible power source to support alternating current frequency/phase control.


b)	ESS when the microgrid is grid-connected


Optimizing powerflow to and from the larger grid: When a microgrid is operating parallel to (connected to) the larger power distribution grid, the ESS can be used to have the microgrid send power to the larger grid, or draw power from the larger grid, at times controlled by the microgrid energy management system (MEMS). The MEMS, using the ESS as its controllable energy reservoir, can send power from the microgrid to the grid whenever the price that the grid would pay for power is highest. Or if the price paid for generated power from a distributed energy resource (such as the renewable microgrid) is fixed, but the grid operator has time-of-use tariffs or dynamic energy pricing, the MEMS can use the ESS to avoid drawing power from the larger grid into the microgrid when grid power is expensive. If neither of these pricing methods are applicable, there may still be demand-charges for high rates of power consumption from the
 
larger grid, and the MEMS, controlling the charging and discharging times of the microgrid ESS, can avoid demand-charges by levelling the microgrid’s consumption of power from the larger grid over the course of each day.


In the case of BCIT’s Energy OASIS microgrid, the microgrid as a whole acts as a dispatchable distributed energy resource (DER) within the larger BCIT campus distribution grid, which is then connected to the utility grid. The microgrid can act at times, when it has surplus energy, as a load-displacement local generation source for the campus. In such a case, the MEMS can schedule microgrid ESS charging and discharging so that the microgrid performs demand peak- shaving in the BCIT distribution grid, potentially reducing demand-charge costs for the institution and making the large-scale electricity customer a better citizen, with more level demand, on the larger grid.


In a broader and longer term context, many smart microgrids connected to a larger smart grid could each use their local ESS to schedule their demand for power from the larger grid, and their contribution of DER power to the larger grid in a manner influenced by price signals (or frequency variation, or demand forecasts, or explicit power requests) from the larger smartgrid. By so doing, a robust decentralized grid stabilization system could be created.


5.1.	Technology Fundamentals

Energy storage technology is diverse and rapidly evolving, as large scale penetration of intermittent renewable generation seems increasingly inevitable, and as electrification of transport gains momentum. There are many criteria on which to evaluate storage technology.
 
Some storage technology may be more suited to large macro-grid scale application. Some is highly site-characteristic specific, with limited opportunities for general application in an arbitrarily located microgrid. Some technology remains in the experimental phase and is not efficient or reliable or cost-reduced enough for routine application yet. A few technologies stand out as the conservative available choice for a microgrid at present, but there are important performance envelope distinctions between sub-varieties of the leading candidate technologies.


This section will review a range of energy storage technologies, comparing and contrasting technical and economic aspects of the presently more realistic choices, then briefly mentioning a range of innovative storage technology alternatives and those more suited for larger grid-scale applications. The realistic energy storage choices will be compared in terms of attributes such as specific energy and energy density, specific power and power density, round-trip energy efficiency, cost, lifespan, safety, and performance in a range of temperatures.


Specific energy is the energy storage capacity per unit of mass of the storage system, whereas, if

the term is used precisely, energy density refers to energy storage per unit of volume.


Specific power is the maximum charging power or discharging power per unit of mass of the

storage system, whereas, if the term is used precisely, power density refers to charge/discharge power per unit of volume.


Round-trip energy efficiency refers to the percentage of the energy input to the storage system

that can be retrieved from the storage system later. Compare energy efficiency of alternative
 
storage systems carefully, since the efficiency rating may be given including alternating current /direct current and direct current/ alternating current conversion inefficiencies, or excluding those and considering only the core storage component (e.g. battery’s) charge and discharge round-trip energy efficiency. How energy efficiency should be compared depends on the application and which of alternating current or direct current electrical power the application supplies to and requires from the storage system.


In a more detailed comparison between storage technologies, for purpose of selection for a particular project, cost should be compared in terms of total storage system cost, including controls, containment, siting and connection, safety certification, and environmental conditioning if required as well as the cost of the core storage component. Cost should be assessed with reference to the usable energy storage capacity or charge/discharge power requirement. Of course, cost to a microgrid over time must consider the lifespan of the storage system and/or its components, and its operating costs.


Expected lifespan of an energy storage system is often given in terms of number of full charge-

discharge cycles to a recommended maximum depth of discharge, and in the case of electrochemical battery storage, refers to the time at which the battery declines to 80%, 70%, or sometimes 60% of its original energy storage capacity, or to the time at which the battery should be replaced for safety reasons.


Thermal performance refers to the range of ambient temperatures in which the core storage

component can operate (or operate with reasonable storage capacity, efficiency, and power), and so relates to the cost and complexity of the thermal monitoring / management system required, or
 
to the range of feasible locations on Earth that the system could be used.


Microgrid-suitable Energy Storage Technologies: A variety of electrochemical battery

technologies are presently feasible for microgrid-scale energy storage applications.


Lithium-ion Batteries - These feature high specific energy (100-265 Wh/kg), high energy density

(250-620Wh/L), high power density (ability to charge and discharge rapidly, for example at 1C or faster), and cycle lifetimes ranging from 2000 to 3000 cycles. One factor that makes them suitable for grid storage is their high round-trip charge/discharge efficiency (DC) of 80 to 92%. Lithium-ion battery systems are relatively expensive compared to, for example, Lead-acid batteries, but the low cycle life (500 to 800 cycles at 50% Depth of Discharge) and low energy density and low charge/discharge efficiency at high charging rate of Lead-acid batteries make them less suitable for daily cycling microgrid applications. Thermal stability of Lithium-ion batteries has improved with the advent of new hybrid cathode chemistries, but thermal management and safety concerns with Lithium batteries require complex containment and fusing design, and a complex battery monitoring and charge and discharge control system.


Nickel-Metal-Hydride Batteries - These have a wide temperature operating range (-30 degrees C

to +65 degrees C) and a fairly long cycle life (500-2000 cycles), but less specific energy (60- 120Wh/kg) and energy density (140-300Wh/L) than Lithium-ion. Weighing against their use as grid storage is their relatively low charge/discharge efficiency of only 66%. They require less complex thermal management systems than Lithium-ion batteries.
 
Nickel-Iron Batteries – This energy storage technology has been used for over 100 years,

powering early electric cars at the beginning of the 20th century. The batteries have been used since then as electric street car and electric train batteries. This battery technology is being resurrected as a potential grid storage technology. The batteries have extremely long cycle life (some have operated for 30 to 50 years without loss of storage capacity), but very low specific energy (25 Wh/kg) and energy density (30 Wh/L), so are large and heavy and this can restrict siting possibilities. Their round trip charge/discharge efficiency is 65% to 80%. Their specific power is only 100W/kg, about a third of that of Lithium-ion batteries.


Of these storage technologies, Lithium-ion batteries may be the best overall choice for microgrid applications in temperate climates currently, due to their energy efficiency, high specific power and energy, and a maturing market of off-the-shelf Li-ion storage system solutions available commercially. For extreme hot or cold climates, Nickel-Metal-Hydride batteries may be the best choice, as less capital and operating energy need be spent on a cooling or heating system.


Pros and Cons of different Lithium-ion Battery Chemistries:



LiMnO2 – Among Lithium-ion batteries, Lithium Manganese Oxide batteries support fast

charging and discharging (high specific power), and high thermal safety, but have high cost, low lifespan, and low specific energy.
LiCoO2 – Lithium Cobalt Oxide batteries have high specific energy but low specific power,

relatively high cost, and moderate thermal safety and lifespan.

Li Nickel Manganese Cobalt Hybrid (NMC) – A hybrid cathode chemistry with a combination of
 
Nickel, Manganese and Cobalt hits a sweet spot of high specific energy, moderate specific power, and good thermal safety and lifespan at moderate cost. NMC is a good choice for moderately large intermittent-renewable microgrids which can afford the thermal management and safety systems which are recommended by NMC battery manufacturers.
LiFePO4 or LiYFePO4 – Lithium Iron Phosphate batteries have poor specific energy, but

excellent specific power, thermal safety (low self-heating), and lifespan at relatively low cost. The newer LiYFePO4 chemistry adds Yttrium doping to the cathode and boasts even longer lifespan and higher specific energy. For smaller scale microgrids which cannot afford an expensive thermal isolation and cooling design, and an elaborate fire-safety system, but can stand a heavier battery system to get storage capacity, Lithium Iron Phosphate batteries are a good choice.


Larger grid-scale energy storage technologies:



Pumped hydro storage – water is pumped uphill into a hydro-dam reservoir then released as

needed. According to Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), this is the most widely deployed grid storage technology, representing, as of March 2012, 99% of bulk storage capacity worldwide (21 GW in the USA and 38GW in the EU). It is suited to very large-scale storage projects, but has limitations such as requiring vertical terrain and very specific siting, a high degree of environmental impact, dwindling available locations, and seasonal unusability (for grid excess power absorption) due to full reservoirs.


Sodium-Sulphur Batteries - These molten-salt batteries have high energy density (150Wh/L) and
 
very long cycle life (2500 to 4500 cycles), a charge/discharge efficiency of up to 89 to 92%, but they operate at 300 to 350 degrees C, and are highly corrosive. Because of these latter factors, Sodium-Sulphur batteries require considerable support infrastructure including complex containment and high power heating systems, and are most suitable for large-scale grid storage applications. New lower temperature Sodium-Sulphur battery technology is in the R&D phase, capable of operating at only 100 degrees C, and may become viable for microgrid-scale applications.


Molten salt heat storage – A large molten-salt thermal mass can be combined with a thermal

steam generation plant to store heat over almost an entire 24 hour day and substantially increase the capacity factor of a solar-concentrator solar-thermal plant.


Experimental energy storage technologies:



Redox Flow batteries – these comprise two tanks of electroactive liquids which generate

electricity by transferring ions to each other through a membrane, similar to a fuel cell. However the reaction is reversible on application of a potential, allowing recharging of the flow battery by reverse transfer of ions through the membrane. Advantages are longer cycle life than conventional batteries due to no solid-solid phase transitions, no need for cell equalization, and ease of state-of-charge determination, low maintenance, and tolerance to overcharge/overdischarge. Energy densities are comparatively low and the systems tend to be complicated due to the need to store and pump liquids. Flow batteries are still largely in the R&D phase.
 


Hybrid ultra-capacitor and battery systems – these can ramp up their rate of charge or discharge

faster than battery-only storage, so can be employed for “bumpless” grid or microgrid stabilization in the face of outage and restoration of power sources or routes. They require complex control, have lower energy density and specific energy than conventional batteries, and are currently significantly more expensive than batteries alone.


Compressed hydrogen storage with electrolysis and PEM fuel cells (CH) - Could be used at a

large centralized facility for regional grid storage – for example time-shifting and capacity factor increase of Wind Energy. CH storage has relatively low roundtrip energy efficiency (20 to 45% alternating current to alternating current efficiency) but potentially very large scalability at low incremental cost.


Underground pumped hydro storage – with two water-filled caverns at different heights, this

operates on the same principle as hydro-dam pumped storage, but can be deployed in level- terrain regions. Creating large caverns underground means high capital construction costs.


Compressed air energy storage (CAES) – is being tested in several varieties: sealed underground

caverns, lake-side underwater air balloons, and advanced adiabatic CAES which extracts and stores the heat of compression and re-applies it during decompression. As of 2011 there were several hundred MW of CAES deployed worldwide. Adiabatic CAES R&D projects are aiming for a round-trip energy efficiency of about 70%.


Gravity energy storage – heavy railcars with electric motors/generators move up and down a
 
long gradual slope. This would be very site-specific and large-scale.


Undersea evacuated spheres energy storage – A proposal to co-locate large undersea concrete

spheres with offshore wind farms. To store surplus wind energy, seawater is pumped out of the spheres, creating a vacuum. Energy is generated later by allowing seawater, under ocean pressure, to refill the spheres, with a turbine in the refilling pipe.


5.2.	OASIS Storage System

The Energy OASIS grid-interactive microgrid at BCIT includes a 500kWh battery energy storage system (BESS) which uses Lithium Nickel Manganese Cobalt batteries and is housed in three quarters of a standard 40 foot shipping container. The remainder of the shipping container houses the control systems and power distribution equipment for the microgrid.


Only 360kWh of energy storage is utilized; the top 10% and bottom 18% of the full depth of discharge of the batteries is unused, to conserve cycle lifespan.


The BESS includes battery management units (BMUs). Each BMU monitors the state of its batteries; voltage, current, and temperature, and uses battery switching modules (power electronics) to allocate charge and discharge current so as to balance the voltage of all battery modules of a battery group. The BESS, via the power conversion system (PCS), is given an overall charging power or discharging power command from the energy management system (EMS) of the microgrid, and makes a best-effort attempt to meet the request. A number of control integration challenges between the BESS, PCS, and EMS presented themselves in the
 
microgrid project, and these will be described in subsequent sections of this chapter.


Planning considerations: Lithium-ion batteries were chosen partly because a reasonably sized

and reasonable weight battery container would provide sufficient energy storage capacity to store several hours of the 250kW photovoltaic array’s power output, and would provide high enough discharge power (at a sustainable 0.5C) to fast-charge two electric vehicles simultaneously, while supporting other microgrid loads. Another factor was that Lithium-ion is now a proven technology: according to US DOE Global Energy Storage Database, 192 MW of Lithium-ion grid-scale storage projects have been commissioned as of August 2014. Lithium-ion was considered low-risk and cost-effective for the required performance, certainly compared to technologies such as compressed hydrogen, flow batteries, or Sodium-Sulphur batteries. Lead- acid was ruled out due to low cycle life, energy density, and charging rate.


Planning was required to determine where the energy storage could be located on campus. It needed to be close to both the PV array and the microgrid loads to minimize cable runs. It needed to be separated from occupied buildings on campus for fire safety. And the site had to be evaluated from a ground loading and seismic perspective, given the weight and size of the system.


Design considerations: After the battery system technology was chosen and it was sized to meet

the microgrid power and energy requirements, other design elements were considered. The battery manufacturer, and the contractor for the battery container, worked together to design the arrangement of the batteries and wiring and ancillary systems like HVAC. The battery
 
manufacturer arrived at a design which featured four independently operable 70kW battery rack- groups in parallel, each with 70 1.8kWh battery modules containing cylindrical Li-ion cells.


Each rack-group (cabinet) contains power wiring, control-and-monitoring wiring and electronics, cooling fans, and a BMU and battery switching module. Each rack-group will provide up to 125 amps at 550 to 725 volts. A master BMU control server also resides in the battery room. It sends BESS monitoring and status data to the microgrid EMS and receives commands from the EMS, and co-ordinates the four rack-group BMUs to achieve the desired charging or discharging power.

Figure 5.1 depicts the BESS container, with 4 battery groups, the master BMU, and the separate room housing microgrid control and electrical distribution equipment. Figure 5.2 is an interior view showing the battery group racks in the container’s battery room.


The electrical integration design for the BESS in the microgrid was to interface the four battery rack-groups, via a DC/DC converter each, to a 1000 volt DC bus residing within the power conversion system. The PV array of the microgrid was also attached to the same DC bus via another MPPT DC/DC converter. PV could then be sent to the batteries without direct current/ alternating current and alternating current /direct current inversion. The DC bus feeds a 4-quadrant bi-directional inverter to convert the direct current to alternating current to serve microgrid loads. The inverter can also be used to feed excess PV (or BESS-stored PV) to the grid, or to accept power from the grid, according to the microgrid EMS’s energy cost optimizing power flow plan.


The block diagram in Figure 5.3 shows the BESS components and their electrical and control interconnections with the power conversion system and energy management system.
 





Evolution of the design: The initial design for the BESS and its electrical and control integration was evolved during the microgrid project over a series of three design summit meetings and a system integration summit meeting, all involving the battery system manufacturer, power conversion system supplier, the battery container integrating company, the energy management
 
system provider, and the BCIT project engineering team. Given that the companies were based in Asia, Europe, Eastern Canada, the Eastern US, and the site was in Western Canada, substantial additional design negotiation was conducted via Internet and teleconference, and opportunity for face-to-face co-design with multiple parties present was limited. This decentralized system- design and component development environment proved to be a challenge, since the individual components; BESS, PCS, and EMS, for the power levels needed, could not be described as off- the-shelf or plug-and-play, and substantial detailed design co-ordination was required to make these components operate compatibly with each other’s capabilities, limits, and design assumptions.
Here, as an illustration that may inform future large-scale microgrid BESS integration projects, is
 
a catalog of BESS design changes that occurred during the project, and had to be co-ordinated across the multinational team:
-	In the earliest design iteration, consideration was given to housing the power conversion system (PCS) in the shipping container along with the Lithium-ion batteries. A fire in a similarly designed system in Hawaii, where fire propagated from the PCS to the Lithium batteries resulting in total system loss, led to a design for the OASIS system where the PCS was placed in a separate National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) standard compliant enclosure external to and slightly separated from the battery container. Another reason for this design shift was to avoid the combined heating effect of a large inverter system co-resident with the Lithium batteries.
-	The next design iteration therefore had an entire 40’ shipping container available for the BESS battery system. A decision was made to use a substantial portion of the 40’ shipping container (1/4 of its length) as a separate OASIS system controls and electrical distribution room, leaving less room for the Lithium batteries. That decision was motivated by the decision to give the entire OASIS system black-start (and true grid failure) operating capability, and for that, OASIS would need all of its control computers (including its energy management system), and its essential communications equipment such as network switches, housed in the container and powerable by the islandable OASIS microgrid. This necessitated a change in the battery rack design to fit in a smaller footprint, and was one reason why the number of BMUs was reduced from 19 to 4 and battery modules were changed to vertical orientation within racks.
-	The battery modules were initially specified to be horizontal, stacked vertically in standard racks, with each rack having only a rack-top exhaust fan for cooling. This was
 
changed to a vertical orientation of each battery module, with a cooling fan per module, to increase air cooling, while allowing compact packing of battery modules into racks.
-	As a further consequence of battery arrangement changes for size and cooling, and the reduction of BMUs, the series-parallel arrangement of the battery modules was altered and more power-monitoring and control boards had to be added to the racks.
-	These changes necessitated custom-designed racks, as depicted in Figure 5.4, and a cost- increase in battery rack design and manufacturing.
-	It was uncertain until late in the project whether active fire suppression was required, leading to delays in container customization design, HVAC design, and container delivery.
-	The control and monitoring (digital communication) interface of the BESS became much more complex in final design than as originally specified in the OASIS System Design document that had been developed from the design summits. In the System Design Document, the interface was specified to have 2 control setpoints (SetBatteryChargeDischargeRate, SetBatterySystemMode) and 4 monitoring measurement and status points (MaxUsableCharge, RemainingUsableCharge, BatteryNetPowerOut, BatterySystemMode).
-	The design intention was that a single or small set of fault status points would complete the control and monitoring interface. In final design, the BESS control and monitoring interface, as seen by the energy management system, included 17 control setpoints and 142 monitoring measurement and status points. The consequences of this change, to the microgrid development project, and to the microgrid’s operability will be explored later in this chapter.
 


Installation process: As figure 5.5 illustrates, the battery (and microgrid controls) container was

assembled, with wiring, power distribution switchgear and panels, empty control computer racks, and empty battery racks, offsite at the container integrator’s facility. Offsite testing included “ringing out” (connectivity testing) all electrical connections. Then the container was trucked to the microgrid site, crane-lifted into place, secured, and populated with battery modules and control computers. It would have been too heavy to ship or lift with the batteries pre-installed.
Then the container’s power and control lines were connected to underground cables which had been laid. All told, the BESS container offsite assembly, siting, and connection took three or four months.
 


Special considerations: Because the BESS was to operate on a campus, campus facilities

management insisted on Canadian Standards Association (CSA) certification of the BESS. Since the battery components did not have this certification, a system-specific CSA inspection of the assemblies of parts in the BESS container was done. Integration of the BESS fire detection system with campus life safety system, and inspection and certification of the fire alarm system to pertinent standards, was also required. The battery racks required seismic design (bracing) and certification of seismic design by a structural engineer.


Testing and commissioning: A subset of the batteries and BMUs were shipped to the PCS

manufacturer’s site in the Eastern US for integration testing. A brief monitoring and control “ping” test was conducted at that time over the Internet with the EMS, being developed in Germany.


After installation at the microgrid site, the battery supplier and PCS supplier began commissioning and testing BESS discharging as controlled by the PCS and BMUs, using a 480V 3-phase load bank and a very long extension cord for mains power for controls, because the power feeder line from the substation to the microgrid site was not complete. Commissioning was completed a month later after the feeder was landed, tested, and connected to the PCS. This commissioning and on-site acceptance test verified physical assembly, wiring assembly and connectivity, and BESS operation under a range of control inputs in both islanded and grid- connected operation.
 





Finally, there was an integration test with the EMS, and a brief microgrid use-case testing period, during which the integrated BESS, PCS and EMS were taken by the development team through several typical operating scenarios (varying PV power levels, loads, grid interaction), to verify that the integration met grid-interactive microgrid operating objectives.


5.3.	Storage Control

Control of BESS battery charging and discharging was achieved in the OASIS microgrid by a collaboration of different control and monitoring systems acting in concert and at different time scales and granularities.


At the top of the control tree, acting at the slowest time scales, the microgrid EMS planned the BESS charge or discharge power level for each 15 minute interval for several upcoming days, seeking to minimize virtual energy costs in the operation of the microgrid.
 


If the microgrid was grid-tied, the EMS then actually controlled BESS charging and discharging, via a Modbus-communicated setpoint passed through the PCS. The EMS adjusted its BESS power setpoint once per minute, to correct for measured deviations from expected PV power or load demand.


The PCS distributed the EMS power request equally among the four parallel battery groups. The PCS was also specified to curtail the EMS’s power request if battery-group state-of-charge (SOCs) were low or high, deliberately making the BESS underperform on the EMS’s power request in a controlled manner. As described in the lessons learned section, there was some confusion of microgrid component responsibility for such curtailment.


The PCS enacted its battery group power targets by adjusting the current control on the PCS’s four digitally controlled DC/DC converters.


The battery switching modules within each BESS rack-group distributed the current among the 70 battery modules under BMU control, while the BMU listened for digitally signaled voltage, current, or temperature limit or fault alarms from the individual battery modules, and stood ready to stop the BESS operation should any fault be signaled.


When the microgrid was islanded, the PCS did not receive a battery power request from the EMS, but instead took over BESS charge/discharge control, employing a fast (sub-cycle) digital current-control loop acting on the PV and battery group DC/DC controllers to ensure that p(PV)
 
+ p(BESS) = p(Load) at all times, preventing voltage or frequency swings.


The complexity of this multi-controller tree of control acting at several time scales with different microgrid operation modes and different objectives and limits at each layer of the tree led to significant integration issues during the development of the microgrid.


5.4.	Storage Integration

As a case study, the following issues arose during the controls integration of the BESS into the OASIS microgrid. The project eventually overcame the critical integration problems, but delays in dealing with them led to high technical risk persisting throughout the project.


There was a tendency of the BESS and PCS suppliers to present as interface to the microgrid EMS their equipment’s off-the-shelf digital interface, or a slight variant of it, rather than to add a control and monitoring interface compliant with the interface specification in the microgrid design document.


Faced with this, the EMS supplier was requested to effectively ensure early in the project that BESS control and monitoring interfaces would be compatible with the EMS. Upon receiving elaborate off-the-shelf BESS control and monitoring interface specifications, the EMS supplier implicitly agreed, by lack of review, but requested (after roughly six months of project time had elapsed), significant late-project changes to the manner that the EMS and PCS would operate the BESS.
 
Apart from the elaborate nature of the BESS interface which the EMS had no scope to deal with, there was a control philosophy divergence. The BESS and PCS suppliers presented an interface allowing the EMS to control inverter output power to/from grid and loads, leaving PCS to manage the combination of PV and BESS power, but requiring mode hints from the EMS as to in what priority those two should be used. After many discussions, the EMS supplier requested the EMS directly control BESS charge and discharge power only, as the original microgrid design document had stated. A redesign of PCS control logic was required, leaving some unplanned artifacts in PCS operation of the batteries.


Additional integration problems, and some project consequences and recommendations arising out of such controls integration problems are elaborated in the lessons learnt section of this chapter.


5.5.	Lessons Learnt

In the process of designing, integrating, and testing the BESS in the BCIT Energy OASIS microgrid context, lessons were learned. A few have to do with project process and ensuring good system engineering practice. Others have to do with the desirable characteristics of a BESS designed for microgrid integration. And finally, some have to do with controls integration from the perspective of how an EMS should control a BESS in an urban microgrid, depending on the use cases of the microgrid and the larger grid’s electricity pricing policy.


Regarding microgrid development project process, several major gaps in BESS control logic persisted until late in the integration and system testing phases of the project and some are still
 
being resolved in an extended microgrid commissioning period.


When the BESS design change was made to 4 independent parallel groups of batteries, the battery supplier assumed that the EMS supplier would take care of state-of-charge (SOC) balancing between those groups, whereas the EMS supplier assumed the validity of the original interface specification of the BESS which had them receive a single SOC estimate for the whole BESS and provide a single charge/discharge rate request.


Appropriate Lithium-ion battery charge control logic; specifically charge current ramping down at high battery SOC, was improperly implemented in the BESS/PCS combination. charge control is being achieved by the PCS repeatedly hitting voltage protection limits, pausing, then re- attempting full current. Overvoltage faults in the PCS DC bus or DC/DC converters at high battery SOC are not uncommon. The poor charge control is due to persistent misunderstandings as to which of the battery supplier, PCS supplier, or EMS supplier was to be responsible for charging current regulation. Battery monitoring data including real-time battery-voltage-aware charging-current limits were provided by the battery supplier to the PCS, and are also readable by the EMS. The PCS supplier believed it was the EMS’s job to set charging current for each of the 4 battery groups based on these dynamic limit values, but the EMS supplier justifiably thought this was in the purview of the battery system supplier working with the PCS supplier.


The order-of-magnitude increase in BESS control-and-monitoring interface complexity from initial system design document to delivered equipment required extensive negotiation over control logic responsibility between the battery and PCS supplier and the EMS supplier, in the
 
last quarter of the project, and left significant control logic gaps as neither party wished to increase their subsystem’s scope. The EMS supplier eventually added programming to fill several of the gaps; for example, controlling the process of battery capacity learning cycling of the battery system, but this was not implemented until the last month of the project.


These control responsibility misunderstandings provide the lesson that key aspects of systems engineering practice or standards must be maintained in an enforceable way throughout the microgrid project, and not just during the initial requirements and specification phase. This is particularly true in a higher-power, larger microgrid project in which each complex power system component (such as a large BESS in a shipping container) is not a fixed-specification unit at the beginning of the project, but has its design and implementation evolving during the project. With complex and evolving digitally controlled power equipment components, there is vast room for component interaction incompatibility, and Murphy’s Law applies in this respect.


A systems engineer role with authority backed by project financial structure: It is important that some party to the project be explicitly responsible for maintaining design adherence, and that the project have a performance-payment structure, and an engineering changes contingency fund, which grants effective authority to the system engineer when they call for design adherence or when they make a decision on a key technical change during the project.


Firm, agreed, non-extendable component control interface specifications: Most importantly, control and monitoring interface specifications between major complex power system components, such as the BESS, the PCS, and the EMS must be finalized early in the project;
 
explicit formal, signed agreement on these specifications between parties must be reached; and consequences ensuring correction must ensue for any lack of adherence to the interface specification by either party’s delivered equipment. It is important to distinguish between a piece of equipment’s off-the-shelf control interface (factory specification document), and the agreed control and monitoring interface for use between components in the particular microgrid system. The latter microgrid-system-level interface must be explicitly agreed between the different interacting-component suppliers, as supervised by the system engineer, and that fully-agreed interface may very well be a small subset of the off-the-shelf interface spec. of a component, or may include higher-level logical commands and computed or summarized monitoring values.


For any control and monitoring aspects that the agreed inter-component interface specification does not cover, it is exclusively the responsibility of the developer/supplier of the individual component to design and implement that component to self-manage (self-monitor, self-control) in those extra degrees of freedom. Adding, or revealing after interface agreement, extra “levers of control” for another component’s use, compared to the agreed “interface-in-this-system” specification, is counterproductive, because it places a late-in-project burden on equipment B’s engineering team to learn the complexities of component A’s operation and adapt equipment B to control component A’s complexities at the last moment. The formally agreed interface specification constitutes both the minimum, and importantly the maximum, interface that the component can present to components it interacts with in the microgrid system.


There was a tendency on the part of component suppliers in the OASIS microgrid project to rely only on the adherence of each power system component to a particular digital communications
 
standard, and to believe that control and monitoring integration would therefore be simple. Digital communication standards, such as Modbus, or even IEC 61850, are too open-ended to ensure component communications compatibility. Furthermore, these standards generally standardize communication aspects only at layers below the application semantics level, and so adherence to the standard does not ensure a meaningful or correct system control conversation. IEC 61850 is an improvement in this regard in that it attempts to standardize the signal names for various application-level concepts, but IEC 61850 is further ahead in standardization and adoption in the power protection domain than in the distributed energy resource or battery storage monitoring and control domain, and the BESS and PCS available to the OASIS project did not have IEC 61850 interfaces. Regardless of protocol standard however, there will still be ambiguities in monitoring and control interaction logic and control responsibility distribution.
System-specific interface specifications between major microgrid power components must be created which are suitable for the conjunction of the particular power and control components and are tailored for joint achievement of the particular use cases of the individual microgrid.


Mid-project command-and-control integration tests: If a microgrid has digital monitoring and control interfaces between major power equipment components such as the BESS and the EMS, then project process should include a mid-project control and monitoring interaction test, using the Internet if equipment cannot be co-located in time for such tests. Such a test could use the actual component on each end, if feasible mid-project, or could use a software stub (emulation) of the component. The entire set of interfaces should be exercised, ideally with equipment live in test harnesses. This will identify not only communication misconfigurations and value misinterpretations, but also gaps in control logic which neither component is handling.
 


In the OASIS project, such tests were scheduled, but some component suppliers were reluctant to participate, and only minimal “ping” tests were able to be conducted in some cases, or tests of 3 or 4 control/monitoring points of a 100+ point interface. Unanticipated communication protocol interpretation incompatibilities were revealed by this testing, in time to be fixed before final system integration. However, the full command and control communication and logic tests could not be performed until the last three weeks of the project, when the BESS and EMS were installed and powered up on site, and had been individually commissioned. A complex and detailed interaction test was performed for the first time at that late date, requiring many adjustments to the control programming of “finalized” delivered equipment. The BESS and PCS supplier did not even then agree that such a test was required, relying on standards compliance of their interface, and on their equipment’s “factory spec” interface, but not accounting for remaining interpretation differences or incompatibilities in actual versus assumed behaviour of commands and components. An end result of this complex last minute control interaction testing was a lack of time for microgrid system use case testing in the project. Only a week of such testing was conducted with a subset of the component suppliers present, at the very end of the funded project period, with no time remaining for corrections of whole-system-level microgrid operational problems. Mid-stream detailed verification of the interactions of complex monitoring and control interfaces, such as the BESS - PCS - EMS interfaces, would have reduced the technical risk in the last quarter of the project substantially, and would have led to a system more robustly able to perform all of its joint-equipment-operating use cases.


A smart microgrid is the software-controlled orchestration of computer-software-controlled
 
smart power components. As such, the

-	interface specification standards (an “interface” is a fixed set of remote-procedure signatures),
-	interface adherence enforcement on interface client and provider (system will not compile or link), and
-	interface stub-testing (prior to full component implementation) conventions

that the software engineering industry employs to manage software subsystem interaction complexity are newly required in the power industry as it designs and assembles smart microgrids.


This leads to a description of some characteristics that the next (or current) generation BESS component should have, to enable its integration into a variety of microgrid applications.


A Lithium-ion BESS should be a self-managing “black box”, with an inbuilt charge and discharge controller, a BMS with capability to balance voltage across all of its battery cells and to identify “spent” cells or modules, and with a simple, fully specified (digital) monitoring and control interface. The interface should be expressed in a modern control and data communication protocol, such as DER/storage-domain IEC 61850, or RESTful web services (that is, an “Internet of Things” API).


Recommended “smart BESS” interface: A smart BESS should have a digital monitoring interface which provides the external system using it with info on present-time dischargeable energy (SOC expressed as usable kWh), on total dischargeable energy capacity when at max
 
routinely operable SOC, on the maximum presently allowed charging and discharging power, on the present-time measured charging or discharging power, and any warning, fault, or failure conditions. An extended interface could even provide an EMS with the datapoints of a dynamically computed charge-discharge power limit curve “box” for the battery system.


The BESS control interface should be restricted to setting the charge/discharge power request, starting/stopping the BESS, if necessary setting it to be in a secondary operating mode such as “capacity learning cycle”, or “dormant – maintain 50% SOC”, and perhaps setting a number of one-time-set and remembered operating configuration options. The BESS should override (limit) the charge/discharge power request whenever it exceeds the allowable charge/discharge rate.


In other words, the BESS interface should speak the simple and high-level language of the EMS

/ microgrid controller which is going to orchestrate its functioning alongside generation and loads in the microgrid, and should not burden that external controller with battery operating details.


Tailoring BESS control to microgrid use cases: As experience was gained with how the OASIS microgrid EMS operates the BESS, several lessons were learned about the need to tailor control of a BESS to grid-interactive microgrid use cases or operating goals.


It was found that the energy cost optimization of the EMS was routinely storing PV to the point of full batteries at every opportunity, when the microgrid was grid-connected, so that the system could delay the need to buy power from the grid in the evening. But since there was no peak
 
pricing in the larger grid, and since in any case the local distribution grid demand peak is at 2pm, this storing surplus PV was not useful. The PV power should have been “sold” back to the grid at the same time it was generated, leaving the batteries to sit at a more lifetime-prolonging 50 to 80% state-of-charge. An EMS energy cost model should include a “tax” on BESS battery charging and discharging, and/or a small cost for deviation from optimal SOC (40 to 50% SOC for Lithium-ion batteries), and/or an accurate model of the energy loss of for example 4% on charging and 4% on discharging. Any of these small additional battery-use cost factors could prevent EMS optimization from unnecessary cycling and unnecessary full-charge maintenance of the Lithium battery system, while allowing the batteries to be topped up and cycled for more pressing reasons such as the opportunity to earn significant money selling power during designated peaks, or the need to prepare for a long intentional islanding period.


The EMS was also found to be firming PV output to the grid to the level based on the PV power forecast. The EMS was adjusting the BESS every minute (including cycling from charging to discharging) to compensate for sometimes very significant fluctuations in PV. In this particular small microgrid grid interconnection, there was no power supply quality contractual reason to be firming the PV output to grid, so this constituted over-cycling of the batteries. This “firming” control also applied in reverse. If microgrid loads were less than forecast, or PV generation was higher than forecast, the BESS would be used unnecessarily, with charge/discharge rate adjusted on a minute-by-minute basis, to absorb the excess available solar power, rather than send it to the grid, which would have been a perfectly acceptable place for fluctuating excess generation to go in this small DER case.
 
Start with a careful review of what the grid-interconnected microgrid’s power consumption and generation behaviour with respect to the larger grid must be, and what if any freedom it has to be variable. Then ensure by careful design review and by testing that EMS operation of the BESS batteries is only done for valid reasons while grid-connected or generator-parallel, and is not done for reasons that turn out to be artifacts of the EMS’s control methodology.


In summary of experience from Energy OASIS BESS integration into an urban microgrid, once EMS goal-directed digital control of BESS battery charging and discharging replaces the traditional method of letting battery voltage and load impedance determine the flow of current to and from the energy storage system, high-level monitoring-and-control logic design and integration becomes key. Careful control interaction design is required between BESS, power conversion system, and EMS, careful requirements specification of the operating philosophy of the BESS in the particular microgrid application is needed, early control integration testing is needed, and full use-case testing of the BESS in the integrated microgrid in various generation states and operating modes is needed, with time and funding reserved sufficient to correct control logic gaps or unanticipated unstable or BESS-lifespan reducing operating regimes. Electrical integration of a BESS is based on a century of electrical engineering practice and standards.
Control integration of a digitally controlled BESS is new terrain which requires a carefully managed process of microgrid-specific innovation and verification.
