8.	Interconnection	
As discussed earlier, grid-tied microgrids can operate in both grid-connected (grid-tied) or islanded- mode [1]. Usually microgrids are connected to the low voltage side of the power distribution system of main power grid. When islanded, the microgrid acts as an autonomous power system, in which frequency and voltage has to be tightly controlled, while the system is held stable and reliable for load variations under different operating conditions. Similarly, when the microgrid is connected to the grid it should not adversely impact the operation of the main power system and its interconnected distribution system.
Connecting and disconnecting a Microgrids to the utility grid creates technical challenges both for the utility grid and the microgrid itself [2]. Some of these challenges are related to safe operation, power quality, reliability and stability for both sides. Before interconnecting a power generating plant such as a microgrid to the main grid, the plant needs to demonstrate that its operation will not adversely impact the reliability, stability, safe operation and maintenance of the interconnecting networks. Such an interconnection needs to meet applicable interconnection standards, such as IEEE-1547 [3], Canadian Electric Code, as well as jurisdictional requirements set by the utility grid operator for reliable operation and safety. Usually these requirements are clearly stated in a Project Interconnection Requirements document (PIR) issued by the power system operator of the utility grid.
8.1.	Screening studies
Utilities usually devise procedures which prescribes how microgrids should be interconnected with utility’s main grid [4]. These procedures require the following studies to be performed by applicants which seek the permit to interconnect with the grid. Depending on the size of the microgrid, its generating capacity and loads, some of the analysis explained herein may not be necessary and can be waived by the permitting utility. The other critical factor is the actual location of the point of interconnection (PCC). If this point is situated at a weak point of the distribution grid then the impact of the interconnection may be significant and more detailed analysis may be required [5].
i.	Initial Scoping Study: To review the interconnection requests and scope of interconnection, documentation requirements, interconnection procedures and process. There may be initial meetings between the microgrid applicant and the interconnecting utility grid representative to start the screening process.
ii.	Interconnection Feasibility Study: To determine the point at which the microgrid DGs will be connected to the utility grid, and where the point of common coupling (PCC) is. Also to determine if there are obvious challenges and obstacles for interconnection and if capacity (rating) of the grid interconnecting equipment such as transformers, breakers, cables and buses allow for microgrid interconnection. This may require the installation of new equipment and/or upgrading the existing ones.
iii.	Interconnection Impact Study: To determine the impact of microgrid operation on the interconnecting distribution network. This is to make sure that reliability, safety and power quality of the distribution grid is not adversely impacted by the operation of the microgrid. The study usually includes the following separate studies:
a.	Equipment Rating Analysis: This study identifies if utility’s existing equipment have the required capacity to handle microgrid’s generation and loads at full capacity.
b.	Distribution power flow and voltage drop Analysis: This simulation study looks at the power flow of the interconnected distribution system as well as the microgrid itself. The
 
study includes microgrid operation in grid-tied and islanding modes. Different scenarios with variations of loads and power flow to or from microgrid to the distribution network are studied. Worst case scenarios at full load or full generating power should also be included in the study. This study should identify issues related to voltage drop at different busses, equipment overload, issues with flow of active and reactive power and power factor at each node of the system.
iv.	Power Quality Study: Operation of DGs especially direct current/alternating current inverters create harmonics which propagate to the interconnected distribution system. Power quality study includes the following subsets:
a.	Harmonics Study
After the microgrid is designed and its components are specified, a simulation study is required to identify the level of harmonics that will be injected into the distribution system by DGs and the nonlinear loads they serve, such as electric car charging stations. If simulation predicts harmonics generation above the acceptable level set by the utility grid, then mitigation strategies would have to be proposed to reduce the level of generated harmonics.
b.	Flicker study
As a sharp and sudden voltage variation, Flicker is regarded as a problem in microgrids. Microgrids could experience voltage flickers when large loads are switched on or off, or when microgrid disconnects or connects to the grid. Simulation studies should be performed to make sure that the flicker frequency and duration does not exceed the acceptable limits.
c.	Voltage stability study
This study can be done together with power flow study to make sure that the voltage at different buses of the system remain within the acceptable range. Also power factor at each node should be predicted to ensure the microgrid does not drop very low. Modern inverters may be equipped with means of voltage and reactive power optimization (VVO). If this capability is used then voltage stability of the nearby distribution system including capacitors banks and tap-changing transformer close to the microgrid must be studied to make sure that inverters, capacitor banks and tap-changing devices do not oscillate together causing voltage fluctuation.
v.	Protection and coordination study
When a microgrid is connected to an existing distribution system it changes the short circuit behavior of the network in its vicinity. Consequently, a detailed short circuit analysis and coordination study is needed to determine the short circuit levels of affected buses and cables, and determine the rating of the current interrupting devices, such as beakers and fuses, and to make sure correct coordination exists between them. Also settings of the protection relays must be revaluated to ascertain that faults do not adversely impact the reliability of the microgrid as well as the distribution system.
vi.	Grounding and Bonding Analysis
 
Interconnection of DGs may significantly impact the ground fault current levels. As such, detailed analysis of the impact of an interconnected microgrid on the grounding and bonding of the neighboring equipment might be necessary.
vii.	Stability analysis
The interconnection between a microgrid and the main grid cannot be allowed to noticeably affect the frequency of the grid. However, in islanding mode, the frequency and voltage of the islanded network is controlled by the microgrid DGs and may vary significantly.
Nevertheless, despite the fact that the microgrid is not connected to the main grid, its loads require the same frequency and voltage stability as the main grid loads. In fact, the voltage and frequency of such load should not vary more than what is specified in codes and standards.
The final stage of the interconnection screening process is called “facility study”. The outcome of this study includes detailed project execution plan, detailed design for infrastructure, facility and equipment upgrade, list of material, and required skilled labor. This study also estimates the cost of equipment, engineering, construction, installation, and the tasks specified by the other screening studies. For example figure 8.1 shows interconnection application flowchart of for State of California.
 



After the system is designed, analysis and tests are needed to prove full compliance with PIR. The results are then captured in an Interconnection Agreement between the Utility and the applicant.
 
In this section the impact of connecting a microgrid to the distribution network is explained and then interconnection requirements, test and commissioning procedures to measure the impact is discussed and finally methods to minimize the adverse impact of microgrid interconnections are explained. A case study and an example is also included for readers to better understand the process.
8.2.	Microgrid Elements
Figure 8.2 shows a block diagram of a typical microgrid, consisting of the following main elements:
a)	Operation, Control and Energy Management System
b)	Data Communication Network
c)	Point of Common Coupling
d)	Microgrid Loads
e)	Power Plants
f)	Islanding Breaker
g)	Synchronizing Mechanism




Item (a) was discussed in Chapter 6 of this book, while Item (b) was covered in Chapter 7. What follows is the discussions on items (c) thru (g).
 
c)	Point of Common Coupling: PCC is defined as the point where Microgrid is connected to the main utility grid. CB3 in Figure 8.2 represent the PCC. CB3 is also called islanding breaker. When this breaker opens, the microgrid is disconnected from the main grid, enabling it to operate as an autonomous power system.
d)	Microgrid loads: Figure 8.2 represents microgrid loads in a single cluster. In reality, different types of loads are connected to the microgrid network at different locations. Critical loads such as emergency lighting can also be connected to the microgrid network. The advantage of this arrangement is that if the main grid is down, critical loads can be supplied by the microgrid sources. In case of microgrid power limitation in islanding mode, Microgrid Load Management and Control system is programmed to shed non-critical loads and keep supplying power to the critical loads.
e)	Power Plants: Microgrids may generally include different types of energy sources, such as wind, solar, small steam or hydro turbines. For simplicity though, Figure 8.2 lumps all such sources together and represents microgrid’s power plant as a single source connected to the network thru a synchronizing breaker. Also there might be an energy storage system connected to the microgrid network via an inverter. The Power Plant on the diagram represents all such sources. Renewable Sources of energy, such as wind and solar, are often intermittent. To mitigate such intermittencies, energy storage system care often used within microgrid networks to compensate for generation variation. The energy storage system can inject power (discharge its batteries) into the main grid or absorb power (charge) from the grid. Regardless of the type of power source, microgrid requires a synchronizing beaker to be able to synchronize itself with the grid. CB1 represents a synchronizing beaker in the block diagram. The function of this breaker will be explained later in this section.
As discussed earlier, power generating sources in a microgrid could include solar plants or wind installations. Due to their specific technologies, each source may have its own requirements for interconnection to the grid.
For instance, Solar Energy consists of arrays of solar panels that are connected to a single phase or three phase inverter. The output of solar panels is a DC voltage which needs to be passed thru a direct current/alternating current inverter prior to its use in the microgrid network.
 



Figure 8.3 shows a solar energy source. The solar panels convert sun’s energy into a DC voltage, which in turn is converted to alternating current at 60 Hz frequency at a voltage equal to the grid voltage by the inverter. There is a control system in the inverter to control the voltage, frequency and power to, or from the main grid.
The Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) Control System maximizes sun energy conversion by controlling the current (Ipv) out of the solar panels. This is needed because sun’s energy changes during the day due to sun’s radiation angle, clouds and shading due to the surrounding environment. MPPT controls panels’ output currents based on their voltages, such that the maximum power of the sun is converted to DC power at any point of time.
Since sun energy is intermittent during the day and not available at the night, a battery energy storage device may also be integrated into the system to be able to better control the flow of energy in and out of the of the whole system. Based on the design the storage system can be connected to the DC bus if the inverter is a bidirectional inverter.
Figure 8.4 depicts a wind energy installation. Wind energy is converted to electric energy by wind turbines. Wind turbines may produce from few Watts to several MW of power. Two main technologies are used to convert wind energy to electric power. These technologies are briefly explained here.
The wind turbine in Figure 8.4 comprises a permanent magnet asynchronous generator which generates a variable frequency voltage and therefore it could directly be connected to the grid. The generated alternating current voltage is converted to direct current voltage by an alternating current/direct current converter. The direct current voltage is converted to 60 Hz alternating current voltage compatible with the voltage and frequency of the grid. The inverter is controlled by a synchronization mechanism which regulates the inverter output voltage and frequency in full synchronization with the grid.
 



Larger wind turbines use Doubly Fed Induction Generator (DFIG) with inverter to connect to the grid [7]. Figure 8.5 shows the block diagram of a large wind turbine power generation systems. In Doubly Fed Induction Generator configuration, the wind turbine’s rotor is coupled with a Doubly Fed Induction Generator rotor via a gearbox. Pitch control system allows wind turbine blades angle to be controlled optimally for a wide range of wind speeds. That means the rotor speed is not fixed and varies with wind speed.


In synchronous generators rotor speed should be kept at sonorous speed to be able to synchronize the generator to the grid. But with DFIG it is possible to control stator voltage and frequency by controlling rotor excitation (field) current and frequency and synchronize Doubly Fed Induction Generator stator. In spite of rotor speed
 
variation, stator voltage of DFIG can be controlled to 60 Hz and to a level equal to the grid voltage and then synchronize the stator with the grid similar to a normal synchronous generator. The following formula show how this is achieved. FRotor is frequency of the excitation (field) current of the rotor.
Depending on the rotor speed (NRotor), the frequency of excitation current is determined and an alternating current variable frequency current with frequency equal to FRotor is supplied to the field of DIFG. This is achieved by controlling the alternating current /direct current and direct current/ alternating current circuits as shown in Figure 8.5.


The direct current/alternating current inverter is a normal bidirectional inverter and is also synchronized and connected to the grid. Therefore, this kind of wind turbine requires a two point connection to the grid. The alternating current /direct current converter works as a variable frequency drive (VFD). Larger wind turbines use this technology to synchronize to the grid. The main advantage of this technology is its ability to capture maximum wind power. Its disadvantage is complex power electronics circuitry and control system.
f)	Islanding Breaker: Inverters can be divided in two different categories in terms of their islanding capability. Some can work totally isolated from the grid, meaning they can regulate the voltage and frequency of their associated power sources. And some would require grid’s signal to be able to make that happen. In a microgrid both types of inverter could be used. A microgrid which requires to have islanding capability has to use the former, while those which do not need such capability can use the latter. In the former case, which is in an islandable microgrid, a mechanism would be required to detach the microgrid from the main grid. CB3 in Figure 8.6 shows an islanding beaker. This breaker is opened when microgrid needs to operate in islanding mode. This is called intentional islanding. CB3 is controlled either manually by an operator, or by a microgrid controller system. It can be closed when CB1 is open enabling microgrid’s power plant to be synchronized to the grid by CB1. CB1 is usually incorporated into the inverter control circuity and is controlled by the inverter. Power plants with Synchronous Generators or DFIG need also a synchronizing breaker such as CB1.
Unintentional islanding (aka unplanned islanding) may happen as a result of a protection function. In general, this will happen when both entities on either sides of the PCC fail to keep the integrity and/or safety of their services. In that case, protection systems on either side of the PCC may force CB3 to trip. As an example, one may consider situations in which the main grid is tripped due to a fault in main grid’s distribution system, or for utility initiated maintenance work. In that case, the islanding breaker must be opened to avoid feeding the fault forward, or prevent the microgrid from feeding its power back to the main grid, thus allowing utility maintenance workers the safety they need to work on their side of the network.
g)	Synchronizing Mechanism: Circuit breaker CB1 in Figure 8.6 is a synchronizing breaker. The synchronizing system (Relay) measures and compares service parameters (i.e. voltage, frequency and phase angle) from both sides of the breaker. If the values are within the specified range as
 
recommended by IEEE 1547.2 standard [8], then CB1 is closed by the synchronization relay. If however, the differences are outside the specified range, then the relay sends command signals to the DG control system to bring the voltage and frequency of the DG closer to the grid voltage and frequency.




The values recommended by IEEE 1547.2 for differences in service parameters are given in Table 8.1.


These recommendations provide also the maximum limits for manual synchronization which happens rarely. Repeated synchronizations using such limits may shorten CB1’s life and may cause damage to DG. For regular synchronization a synchronizing relay or a synchroscope should be used. With current synchronization relays, together with proper DG control system, it is possible to close the breaker at a point where the difference between both sides is almost zero.
8.3.	Microgrid Impacts
Despite many benefits and advantages which microgrids have to offer, they have the potential to create power quality and harmonic issues for their interconnecting main grid. That is generally due to the fact that most DGs are connected to the grid via a power electronics inverter. Inverters are nonlinear
 
switching devices which tend to generate harmonics. If proper filters are not incorporated in the inverter, these harmonics will find their way into the main grid. Newer multilevel inverters create less harmonics and may be a better option to be used for power conversion in microgrids [9].
The installation of a delta-wye, delta-zigzag, or wye-zigzag – provides an effective means of preventing triplen (3rd, 9th, 15th, etc.) harmonics from passing to the load side of the transformer. The other odd harmonics should be cancelled using proper filtering techniques.
Recommended level of harmonics generated by a microgrid is given in IEEE 1547.2 [8] and IEEE 519- 1992 [10] standards. The following tables show IEEE recommended current and voltage harmonics levels generated by a source.

Voltage Regulation:

Voltage variation and flicker is also important in microgrids. Flicker is a sudden change of voltage magnitude which may cause lights to flicker. Voltage variations and flicker could damage motors and home appliances if these happen too often, or if the absolute value is too high. Flicker is common in grids that have large amounts of intermittent energy resources, such solar and wind. In islanding mode, this could prove to be more damaging since the main grid which acts as a slack generator is disconnected. To minimize flickers, fast responding energy storage systems, parallel to intermittent DGs, are necessary to work as a slack source to dampen voltage variations.
A DG unit can operate in parallel with the grid without causing a voltage fluctuation at the PCC, if its output is within ±5% of the prevailing voltage level of the grid at the PCC, and meet the flicker requirements [8].
The flicker limit for distribution systems including microgrids is also given in IEEE 141-1993 standard as shown in Figure 8.7. The figure shows acceptable voltage flicker limits most utilities use as their baseline. There is a visibility curve (the lower curve) beyond which the flicker is observable. The upper curve is the limit where flicker is intolerable and objectionable. At 10 per hour, people begin to detect incandescent lamp flicker for voltage fluctuations larger than 1% and begin to object when the magnitude exceeds 3%. 

Voltage sag is also an issue in microgrids specially in islanding, when large loads could be switched on. Prolonged voltage sags could damage the loads connected to the microgrids. Voltage sag are due to large motor starting, or a short circuit. Proper motor starting procedures such as soft starter should be used if the microgrid feeds large motors. Fast charging stations may also cause prolonged voltage deeps if they draw large current for fast charging [11].
At steady state operation, the voltage limits at the PCC, where the grid is connected with a microgrid, are specified in ANSI C84.1 Range A [8].
DC current injection:

Injection of DC current from DGs such as inverters into the power network causes the displacement of alternating current voltage peak value, and results in power transforms core to saturate faster. For this reason, the standard requires that DGs DC current injection should not exceed 0.5% of the full rated output current at the point of interconnection [8]. Usually larger inverters are connected to the network via an isolating
 
connected transformer. The isolating transformer blocks DGs DC current injection as well as preventing triplen harmonics from propagating through the distribution network.
Power Factor:

Some utilities require power factor at the point of common coupling to be maintained within 0.9 lagging or leading [5]. Moreover, most modern inverters coupled with an energy storage systems have the capability of operating in 4 (P,Q) quadrants, where P indicates active power and Q denotes reactive power. Figure 8.8 shows a 4 quadrant inverter’s operating zones. It is seen that the inverter can inject (discharge) or absorb (charge) a certain amount of active and reactive power to the distribution system. This functionality can be utilized to control the voltage and power factor at PCC or use the inverter as a Volt Var Optimization (VVO) device.


Protection:

A microgrid’s connection with the main grid’s distribution system may adversely affect the protection settings of utility assets in the vicinity of the PCC [12]. A new coordination study is necessary for the interconnected system around PCC. In legacy distribution systems, faults are fed by the utility source only. In such case, there are well-developed techniques to coordinate protection equipment, such as breakers and fuses for distribution systems. In a microgrid connected to the main grid, a fault can be fed from both the utility and microgrid sources. Figure 8.10 shows fault current contributions from a microgrid DG and from the utility grid. All DGs will all contribute to the fault. The figures shows that the short circuit level of the feeder is changed due to the microgrid connection. The microgrid fault current contributions may alter the short circuit levels to the point where fuse-breaker mis-coordination could occur. This could affect the reliability and safety of the distribution system. Therefore it is necessary to
 
make a new coordination study to consider contribution of DGs to the fault currents and coordinate the fuse and barkers accordingly.




Also feeders and cables’ capacity may need to be upgraded after the microgrid is commissioned.
Protection limit setting and normal operating range of microgrids at PCC is usually defined by the local utility. For example BC Hydro’s technical requirements for connecting DGs with less than 100 kW to the BC Hydro grid is explained in a detailed document called DGTIR-100 [5]. The document also specifies applicable Canadian Electric Codes for interconnecting DGs. Similarly California Energy Commission has issued a guideline for interconnecting electric generating equipment to the grid. Table 4.2 shows a summary of protection setting and normal operating range of a microgrid at the point of interconnection for state of California [6].
 



Overvoltage Switching Transient:

Microgrids with large generating capacity may inject unacceptable overvoltage transients into the distribution grid when switching on and off DGs, or connecting/disconnecting large microgrid loads, or due to a ground fault. High overvoltage transients my damage the equipment connected to the grid. Especially when a microgrid is connected to the main grid via transformers, which one or both sides of them, isolated from the ground, sever overvoltage transients may happen. For larger microgrids an overvoltage transient study is needed to make sure that the overvoltage transient beyond the acceptable limit does not happen on the microgrid network and on the distribution grid [13].
Voltage and frequency Stability:

Control of voltage and frequency of microgrid in islanding mode is an important task of the microgrid control system. The control system should be able to keep the voltage and frequency within the
 
acceptable limits in spite of microgrid load variations. Because the system is disconnected from the grid (weak system) any small variation of load my cause fluctuation of voltage and frequency of the DGs and DGs may start to oscillate with each other and go out of synchronism easily [14].
Anti-islanding protection:

Anti-islanding protection is a safety and protection requirement for microgrids. Anti-islanding protection ensures that an interconnected microgrid stops injecting power into a powered-down main grid within a short period of time (0.1 sec) by activating microgrid’s islanding breaker. This ensures safety for electrical workers working on the disconnected distribution system as well as the public [5]. DGs and inverters should have built in protection circuitry to detect anti-islanding situations and act accordingly.
8.4.	OASIS Case Study
OASIS Microgrid is located on BCIT’s main campus in Burnaby. It incorporates two parking canopies covering 120 car stalls in an area of 1664 m2. The project consists of arrays of solar photovoltaic panels and Li-ion battery energy storage system; connected to one of BCIT's existing substations through a 208 kW bi-directional, three phase direct current/alternating current inverter, which in turn is connected to the BC Hydro network. The point of common coupling (PCC) is the existing BCIT receiving station- located on the campus which connects to a 12.5 kV BC Hydro overhead line [15].
BCIT Burnaby campus receives power from three main receiving stations. One is a 12.5 kV overhead feeder (OH) that supplies North campus receiving station. The area served by North receiving station contains a peak load of 2.12 MW, and the full load capacity of 9.2 MVA. The distribution to the designated buildings (loads) is through 11 substations in North campus area.
As discussed, OASIS Microgrid is a grid-interactive system- which include energy storage system –and is capable of operating in parallel with utility, as well as operating completely isolated from BC Hydro’s grid and in stand-alone (islanding) mode. Therefore, OASIS Microgrid requires to have access to the available power on the utility feeder. Interconnection of such a system with the utility grid is critical. To obtain the permit to interconnect with BC-Hydro, OASIS Microgrid had to implement the above discussed process and conduct all the required studies and reviews.
Given the fact that BCIT’s power consumption at the point of interconnection was much higher than the OASIS generating capacity, the OASIS microgrid fell under BC Hydro’s load displacement program and was required to meet the technical requirements of “35 KV and below Interconnections requirements for Power Generators”. These requirements aim to ensure safe isolation for maintenance, islanding, grid-tied operation, protection, fail safe, transient stability and harmonics propagation. These requirements and the tests/analysis conducted to prove full compliance with these requirements were then captured in an “Interconnection agreement” document concluded by relevant stakeholders. This section provides an overview of OASIS project, referring to a highly simplified single line diagram of the whole system included in Chapter 4 (Fig 4.3).
General requirements:

OASIS microgrid needed to meet the requirements stated in BC Hydro’s Distributed Generation Technical Interconnection Requirements (DGTIR) document “35 kV and Below Interconnection Requirements for Power Generators”. This document outlines project responsibilities, general
 
requirements (such as the physical location of the PCC, safety, synchronization, safe isolation), and the certifications that are required to certify that the OASIS’s power generation facility was designed, constructed and tested in accordance with BC Hydro’s DGTIR spec. This document also outlines and describes the performance requirements for power quality (switching over-voltage transients), and voltage and current harmonics. Additionally, the impacts of harmonic injections from the OASIS microgrid bi-directional, 4-quadrant, CSA C22.2 No. 107.1-01 certified direct current/ alternating current  inverter and EV charging stations were required to be explored through harmonic distortion analysis.
Protection:

OASIS microgrid provided protections with adequate sensitivity to detect and clear all electrical faults on its premises coordinated with other BCIT and BC Hydro protection systems. OASIS Microgrid installed a controllable circuit breaker (CB) on its feeder, associated with a multi-function protection relay. The overcurrent protections were required to protect the OASIS feeder in scenarios where the current flow in the OASIS feeder exceeded the protection preset value; and were achieved by implementing an instantaneous and time-overcurrent protection (ANSI 50/51).
To meet the service entrance protection requirements, OASIS Microgrid utilized the under/over voltage (ANSI 27/59) and under/over frequency (ANSI 81) within its protection relay. During abnormal operating situations or a fault on the BC Hydro system, OASIS may experience voltage deviations. Through implementation of timed under-voltage tripping (ANSI 27) and overvoltage (ANSI 59) tripping, OASIS would be able to protect its equipment. For safety, a preventative and corrective interlock system was implemented. As such the multi-function protection relay on OASIS feeder was interlocked with BCIT feeder protection relay in the upstream receiving station. OASIS would disconnect and stop supplying power to the BCIT/BC Hydro distribution lines-in case the receiving station feeder protection relay was activated. Additionally, OASIS inverter was equipped with anti-islanding protection mechanism to disconnect OASIS in case BC Hydro/ BCIT network were disconnected from the main distribution network.
Moreover, the circuit breaker would trip if any of the phases was lost or there was loss of power to the protection relay. By implementing these measures OASIS’s generation facility was able to detect the loss of phase and power and isolate itself from the distribution system.
Automatic synchronization to the grid was done by the inverter control and protection system. Moreover, OASIS’s equipment was rated to carry and interrupt the fault levels that would be, or will be available at the OASIS’s generation location.
A protection coordination study analysis was conducted to assist with identifying the service entrance protections. Subsequently, it was identified that the main relay in the upstream receiving station did not meet the required standard for clearing time and would not clear a fault more than 0.4 seconds before the BC Hydro substation breaker opens. While these relays do technically coordinate, BC Hydro required the relay to clear faults faster. To implement the recommended settings a complete site wide coordination study was required for BCIT campus distribution network before any adjustments were made to the main entrance relay at the PCC.
OASIS was also required to operate its generation facility in such a way that voltage levels on the BC Hydro distribution system would stay within their acceptable range. OASIS utilized the necessary
 
functions to trip its feeder circuit breaker when the voltage was outside the predetermined limits. OASIS’s generation facility was also required to cease to energize the BC Hydro system within the clearing times as indicated in BC Hydro’s DGTIR document for 35 kV and above systems. As for the under/over frequency trip settings and timings, BC Hydro determined those limits on a case-by-case basis. These functionalities were implemented and utilized in the multi-function protection relay installed at the OASIS feeder.
For safe isolation, the applicable standards required the inverters to cease energizing the distribution system within 0.1 seconds upon loss of the BC Hydro supply, as specified in BC Hydro’s DGTIR document. The DG system would stay de-energized until grid was returned to its normal state. This functionality was provided by the CSA certified bi-directional inverter in PCS.
Control and Telecommunications Requirements:

As described in the BC hydro’s DGTIR interconnected at 35 kV and below, monitoring and control of generators that connect to BC Hydro distribution system was required only for projects that were 1 MVA or higher in size. Although there were no specific requirements for this plant; however, as part of the research and demonstration aspect of the project, OASIS installed power quality measurement meters and recorders at its feeder (480V), at the high voltage (12.5kV) side of the step-up Wye-Wye transformer in BCIT’s distribution substation, and also in the power conversion system on both alternating current and direct current connections.
The data gathered from these metering and recording devices were visualized and made available to the system operators through HMI(s) for the substation automation system as well as for the energy management system.
Project Interconnection Requirements (PIR):

The DGTIR for connecting to BC Hydro at 35kV and below only identified the minimum technical requirements a distributed generation system must meet, and outlined the expected system conditions that DG facilities could encounter while connected to the BC Hydro’s system. When required, more site and project specific studies and requirements for additional protection and control equipment would be stated in Project interconnection Requirements (PIR). In OASIS’ case, this document was prepared jointly by BCIT and BC Hydro. BC Hydro needed to make sure that the addition of the OASIS Microgrid did not negatively impact the safety of BC Hydro personnel or general public or the reliability and power quality for customers already connected to the feeder that the power generator was connected to. To ensure OASIS project – as an interconnection customer (IC) - would meet these requirements, OASIS was required to submit to BC Hydro a series of documents as described in the PIR and included : OASIS facility construction issues of the overall one-line diagrams, protection, control, data communication, three-line alternating current diagrams, site plan(s) of OASIS Microgrid, private line (complete with major pieces of equipment, location of PCC (and a piece of BC Hydro feeder ), substation (with all major buildings and pieces of equipment, property fence, main gates, and access road), interconnection protection settings (magnitudes and timings), interconnection protection coordination study (from the IC interconnection protection to BC Hydro feeder protection), DC system (batteries, chargers, DC supplies), power distribution and alarm schematics, manufacturer's technical specifications (or data sheets) of generator unit, inverter, entrance circuit breaker and interconnection protection relay, interconnection verification
 
and inspection (i.e. commissioning tests) plan for review, schedule of commissioning tests identified in the plan above, and last but not least the engineering record drawings (i.e. as-built drawings).
As a result of the PIR for BCIT’s OASIS Microgrid no special isolation procedures had to be in place to isolate this project when work takes place on the DC feeder that the solar panels connect to.
In conclusion, in order to synchronize and connect OASIS to the electrical grid, BC Hydro, as the main utility company of the province, as well as the local municipal authorities, imposed certain guidelines and technical requirements to make sure that the operation of OASIS would not adversely impact the reliability and power quality of the interconnected distribution network and would not create risks to the operating and maintenance personnel. BCIT’s OASIS Microgrid secured an interconnection agreement (IA), which has allowed OASIS to be fully operational since it’s completion in March 2014.

