9.	Microgrid Economic, Environmental & Social Studies	

This chapter looks beyond the purely technical issues to explore some of the complexities associated with the economic, environmental and societal aspects of microgrids, and brings emphasis to some of the intangibles such as energy surety, local benefits, and a broader system wide compatibility, and the issues surrounding them. The chapter discusses economic justification, environmental assessments, community outreach, consumer behavior and the interconnectedness of these topics in the context of renewable energy and microgrids. A case study summarizing the energy awareness and reduction campaign conducted under Campus Microgrid initiative at BCIT is included at the end of the consumer behavior discussion.


Making the case for microgrids requires comprehensive and holistic studies of energy use in the context of social, technical, environmental and economic issues which are highly interdependent in nature. These interdependencies form a symbiotic socio-techno-enviro economic relationship which needs more study in order to be adequately characterized and understood. Some cost benefit analyses have been done in the US [7], Europe [4], and in Canada [3], although to a lesser degree. However, not enough has been done to the extent needed to understand and characterize the issues, let alone to highlight benefits that could be achieved with microgrids. In a recent publication by Lund University in Sweden [0], the challenges associated with broad scale projects like those associated with climate change, have been dubbed “Wicked Problems”. Wicked Problems are problems that are so complex they have many causes with a web of interdependencies influencing one another so as to make it extremely difficult to identify and target the causes without triggering unpredictable interactions.
 
From a techno-economic perspective, it remains difficult to justify investment in microgrids until they can be integrated into the super grid in which case the benefits like resiliency, distributed command and control, security, can be assessed. This is a complex and multi-faceted task.
Some of the issues include how to quantify the intangibles such as energy surety, local benefits, and a broader system wide compatibility. From a socio-techno-economic perspective, grassroots movements and behavioural change campaigns can have a huge impact towards influencing energy conservation habits, development and adoption of renewable energy technologies, and development of standards and policies that support these objectives. Yet even at the most basic level there are complex linkages between our awareness of issues and options, the conservation options we choose, the technologies that are available on the market to help us realize our choices, and the policies and processes that support all these options. Environmental issues to be considered include the substantial amount of greenhouse gas emissions produced from burning fossil fuel and the negative impact of these emissions to the local community and our planet.
Transportation of fossil fuels has associated economic costs that impact communities, emission costs caused by the transport vehicles, and increased risk of further environmental damage through potential fuel spills which contaminate soil, groundwater, the food chain and the entire cycle of life. To capture and quantify benefits from all of these extremely diverse and yet closely connected perspectives requires a holistic vision and cross-discipline collaborative approach that is critical to winning against climate change.


Microgrids have been studied for a number of years, and their potential benefits, for example to improve power surety and reduce emissions, are widely discussed, but the current status of microgrid projects in general is largely at the prototyping and demonstration phase.
 
Demonstration projects aren’t intended to be financially viable, but consideration of eventual viability factors, such as understanding demand requirements, can influence design choices and provide more robust options for future deployment. In the last few years a number of microgrid pilot projects have been successfully demonstrated and advances made to identify and resolve remaining issues such as scaling, and integration. In the longer term these kinds of activities can help to move microgrids toward future commercialization and the integration of microgrid networks system wide.


Case-studies based on the demonstration projects have tremendous potential to provide knowledge dissemination and to identify transferable socio-economic and environmental lessons that may be applicable in other contexts. Identifying and communicating microgrid projects in this way can lead to overall increased awareness, better understanding by individuals of how they can fit into the picture, official mandates and political commitment, and a long-term vision for microgrids and renewable energy. To evaluate the case studies, however, calls for a framework that considers the multi-faceted nature of the issues, while providing coordinated identification and selection methodologies, standardized data collection and reporting, and host of similar coordination and standardization considerations.


The Campus Microgrid Energy OASIS microgrid highlighted in this book was conducted as a demonstration project, and is representative of an Urban Microgrid. At the outset of that project, specification for microgrids was a significant missing piece of the puzzle. Specifications of this kind were not well understood and there was uncertainty among end-consumers, utilities, and related stakeholders as to what the specification should look like. The simple and compelling
 
premise of the Campus Microgrid project was that over the life-cycle of the project, by improvising on the initial specification, the project would result in experiential learning and the generation of real-world data which could be leveraged to support socio-techno-economic and environmental justification for microgrids. In particular, the Energy OASIS microgrid is going a long way towards demonstrating some of the socio-economic benefits that may be associated with Urban Microgrid installations in other contexts, including the ability to support a portion of the campus loads while isolated from the main grid, and ability to contribute energy from a renewable source (solar PV) to offset the campus requirements for power from the utility grid.


The high cost of energy and energy supply issues in off-grid communities can be deterrents to new businesses, limiting future economic opportunities in remote communities. In Canada there are over 290 remote and First Nations communities [10] who rely largely on diesel generators for their power. While the total population of British Columbia’s remote communities is smaller than the overall population in other provinces or territories such as Quebec or Nunavut, over 85 of those communities are located in British Columbia, more than any other province in Canada. The significant social, environmental, and economic costs this represent are further underscored with an example from one of the 38 remote communities in the province of Ontario which for 2008, had a reported consumption of 1.2 million liters of diesel fuel, and over 3400 tons of carbon emissions [11]. From a socio-economic perspective, taken on its own, the environmental costs illustrated in this localized example are difficult enough for people to grasp, but for society to understand the multi-faceted effects of similar scenarios combined on a global scale is virtually impossible. Establishing microgrids in both remote and urban communities will contribute to increased awareness, to optimizing local renewable energy, and to accelerate the
 
transition to renewable energy system-wide.



9.1.	Economic Justification

Historically, management of the main power grid has meant maintaining the same standards for power quality and reliability (PQR) targets across the entire network of the power grid. This “all things to all people” approach means that infrastructure and operational investment and strategies often target a middle ground, the impacts of which are felt as benefits by some, but as losses by others [8]. One of the local economic benefits and justification for microgrids is that the source of power is located close to the demand, providing the potential to reduce both distribution and transmission network capacity, and transmission losses. System wide in North America, and within urban environments, there are residential and commercial pockets that share grid connections with key buildings and infrastructure such as hospitals, schools, data centres, and military bases, where it is critical to match loads to energy supply at all times. In contrast there are many other pocket communities, where it may be less critical to maintain such service levels, and where there could be more flexibility to make decisions dependent on a series of factors. The current electricity grid was never designed to juggle such complex decisions. Microgrids provide the capability to tailor local requirements, facilitate multiple decision-making and improve overall reliability. In order to fully utilize these benefits, however, they first need to be quantified and integrated into applicable regulatory frameworks.


For the most part, all microgrids strive to offer the same benefits, namely to provide reliable, resilient, and secure power on a localized scale. For many parts of the North American grid investment has been driven by crisis such as the blackout of the Northeast blackout of 2003
 
affecting Canada and the US, and hurricane Sandy, resulting in emergence of new policies, such as mandatory reliability standards. When this is further supported by favorable economics, such as the falling cost of renewable energy technologies, then the cost-benefits of improved resiliency, security and disaster recovery from integration of microgrids make conventional economic sense and become fairly easy to justify. From a socio-economic perspective, where people have experienced a crisis first hand, the prospect of self-reliance for power offered by microgrids becomes an easy sell.


For many other areas including the province of British Columbia in Canada, the cost of electricity is so low as to make the economics of urban microgrids extremely difficult to justify. In regions of low cost electricity, a strong case needs to also be made for other more intangible benefits of microgrids. Canadian and US electricity grids have many active interconnections [9] and have traded electricity to the tune of billions of dollars. The US is increasingly engaged in projects to improve resiliency and reliability in the North American grid. This mandate will require coordination between Canada and US for micro- and macro-grid infrastructure, regulatory issues, and communication and related standards. Indeed concerns over impact of climate change to the shrinking arctic ice pack, and the needs of northern communities to reduce their reliance on diesel generators, have helped to trigger a program of microgrid demonstration projects in Alaska and other arctic locations. While the location is more remote, this scenario too has some fairly tangible benefits making the economics justification more straightforward.


Advocates of microgrids are able to envision the many intangible benefits as contributors to a larger picture such as steps towards facilitating the transition to renewable energy sources. While
 
many kinds of intangible benefits have been identified, still others can only be surmised. Furthermore, the full spectrum of benefits that could be attained from microgrids varies depending on local conditions including the end-consumer requirements, geographic location, climate, regulations and others. The intangibles will only become quantifiable and understood as more microgrids are implemented leading to development and analysis of case studies and to the broad dissemination of lessons learned from those case studies.


One of the key intangibles is energy surety which encompasses reliability, resiliency, security, and disaster recovery. Energy surety means having assured access to reliable supplies of energy, the ability to protect and deliver sufficient energy to meet operational needs, and the ability for disaster recovery. Use of microgrid modeling and simulation tools have been proposed [12] as a mechanism for analyzing various options for local scenarios to find the optimal configuration of component technologies that will maximize the economic rate of return for a potential solution. Until such time as we can better put a price to the intangibles, and are in a position to calculate pure monetary costs, use of simulations could help build economic justification for microgrids and renewables.


At the local level, benefits of microgrids can contribute to the deferral of potential infrastructure investments via reduction or shifting of peak loads thereby reducing peak demand charges and electrical consumption costs. Energy cost reductions can come from reduced energy use, for example from increased efficiency and demand response (DR), or from reductions in peak charges and consumption costs. In the case of the Campus Microgrid identified earlier, further benefits could be achieved through use of the microgrid facility as a living lab research,
 
development and demonstration environment, and as a teaching and learning aide.


From a techno-economic perspective a number of studies have been done around how business cases and cost-benefits analysis for microgrids can work, for example in Canada the NSMG-Net project [13], in the US the LBNL studies [8], and in Europe the More Microgrids [6] project.
Recent large-scale black-outs have made it clear that the top-down architecture and unidirectional power flow of the existing North American electricity grid is becoming less and less sustainable. Comfort level by utilities with new grid-interconnection approaches appears to be increasing, and as support for new ownership and regulatory models grows, so will the adoption rate of microgrids. In the meantime, cases could be made for microgrids where the development of the super-grid would require huge investments.


As discussed elsewhere in this text, microgrids can be categorized as off-grid (ie remote communities), grid-enabled (ie urban communities), and mobile (ie forward operating bases) microgrids, and incorporate a wide variety of technologies, generation architectures, use case scenarios, and business models. Emerging microgrid business models can include any combination of utility-implemented, customer-owned, microgrid-as-a-service, or pay-as-you-go approaches. Perhaps one of the most compelling cases for future system-wide adoption can be made by focusing on the islanding capabilities afforded by microgrids. The ability of key buildings or neighborhoods including hospitals, and schools to support themselves when isolated from the main grid could be a strong selling point with the community, utilities, and policy makers.
 
In jurisdictions like the Province of British Columbia in Canada, where regulatory pressure keeps the cost of energy low, it can be difficult to justify the investments into microgrids. However, it is critical even in these artificially kept low energy cost scenarios, that we change our current way of thinking towards a holistic and future thinking approach, with less emphasis on the immediate economic payback. If the barriers, which are largely regulatory and social in nature, could be broken, the integration of renewable sources and energy storage into a network of microgrids could not only have a significant impact on Urban Microgrids and the Renewable Energy economy, but could also help to better secure the future of our local and global environment.
Society has become more and more inured to hearing terms like “climate change” and “global warming”. The socio-economic benefits most frequently identified with microgrids such as [1] raising awareness for energy and greenhouse gas reductions, creation of new research and job opportunities, and electrification of remote communities have also lost their meaning and impact. It is critical to the economic justification for microgrids that the rationale grow from collaborative partnerships towards the diverse interests within our communities.


9.2.	Environmental Assessments

An environmental assessment is a means of discerning how a project impacts the environment before the project is permitted to go ahead. Generally, environmental assessments are done for large projects that could harm the environment. An environmental assessment is a planning and decision-making tool that predicts the negative effects a project could have on the environment. It identifies potential ways to avoid or mitigate these effects. The Environmental assessment process is important to ensure that major projects meet the goals of environmental, economic and
 
social sustainability. The assessment process is also needed to ensure that the issues and concerns of the public, interested stakeholders and government agencies are considered.


In Canada, governments use the information from environmental assessments to help them decide whether or not the project can go forward. Under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) 2012, any project may be required to conduct an Environmental Assessment (EA) when there may be adverse environmental impact within federal jurisdiction. Potential adverse effects include: impact on Aboriginal Peoples, such as limiting their use of lands and resources for traditional purposes; and changes to the environment that are directly linked to or necessarily incidental to any federal decisions about a project. As part of the EA process, the Government of Canada is obliged to consult and accommodate Aboriginal Peoples. Aboriginal consultations seek to achieve informed consent and early involvement in the process. Information regarding requirements and scope for an EA can be found on the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency website [https://www.ceaa-acee.gc.ca/].


British Columbia is the only Canadian province to have its own dedicated office to undertake environmental assessments. The Province's Environmental Assessment Office (EAO) was established under the Environmental Assessment Act in 1995. Information can be found on the Provincial Government’s Environmental Assessment Office website [http://www.eao.gov.bc.ca/]. A project may be excluded from the CEAA requirement if it is determined that the province will conduct an equivalent assessment.


Environmental assessments in general share commonalities in the areas that are reviewed. These
 
include examination of the project’s regional and national context, location and proximity factors, geophysical environment, aquatic and terrestrial environments, atmospheric environment, socio-economic characteristics, project technology components, and the project development and operating activities.


Microgrids by definition include integration of renewable energy sources. Any form of energy production will have some level of environmental impact. If one considers the full life-cycle of a renewable energy resource such as a solar photovoltaic panel, the manufacturing process from extraction of raw materials to delivery of the panel will have an associated environmental impact. To build a microgrid will require use fossil-fuels through the construction project life- cycle and will result in some environmental impact. Still, by most measures, the integration of renewable energy sources are generally acknowledged to have a significantly lower environmental impact than nonrenewable sources. Renewable energy technologies, however, introduce novel characteristics such that potential environmental impacts are of a different nature. By improving our understanding of the current and potential environmental issues associated with each renewable energy source, we can take steps to effectively avoid or minimize these impacts through their incrementally integrating them with the grid. Wind and solar photovoltaic systems require large areas for viable energy production. In the case of wind turbines, for example, very little of the land is actually occupied by the turbines themselves. As a result, most of the land the wind farm occupies may still be used for other purposes, such as grazing or crops. Offshore wind farm locations can reduce visual concerns, and the open ocean provides a very good wind resource.
 
9.3.	Community Outreach

Most consumers do care about the use of renewable energy. However, a number of recent conferences and studies, such as a 2011 study commissioned by NREL [5], indicate that interest is declining, while at the same time changes in behavior are growing. The good news here may be that this seemingly backwards finding is generally attributed to new behaviors having become less burdensome to the point of being so fully integrated into daily routines that they have become second nature. Still, in the minds of consumers, terms like “renewable energy” and “microgrid” are lumped into broadly categorized concerns, such as “climate change”, and “energy conservation”. As discussed earlier, over time these kinds of categorizations are increasingly losing much of their appeal with the public and have come to be associated with insurmountable issues leading to dis-engagement rather than engagement with consumers and within communities. Our attitudes are closely connected with our beliefs, and people generally believe that renewable energy and conservation measures are positive things. However, in the case of renewables, and microgrids specifically, public awareness and understanding of the available options remains very low. People who live in close proximity to a renewable energy facility are generally more likely to have a significant level of awareness and stronger belief in the value of renewables. This information should tell us that while there are many different approaches to community outreach, the outreach strategies that are likely to work best, are those that include some form of interaction and develop a sense of ownership with the public.


The Global Learning Forum 2015 (http://forum.renewablecities.ca/), highlighted an outreach project by Greenpeace Brazil to engage with school children for a renewable energy project to bring solar PV to their school. Among the many tactics available, the project leaders decided
 
that the best way to achieve their objectives would be to use a showcase approach that included increasing awareness and engaging with people in a way they feel touched by or connected with the project, a process for public support, and a crowdfunding campaign. The project team believed that if stakeholders felt an ownership in the project, they would also feel empowered to replicate it elsewhere in their communities. Students were engaged in experiential learning activities including contributing input to design and right through to helping with the installation work. The project was implemented, reached millions through its social network, brought changes to local tax policies, and requests for stakeholders to share their experiences and help with replication of the project in other contexts.


Many cities like Copenhagen, Denmark and Vancouver, Canada are adopting 100% renewable energy policies (World Future Council and Renewable Cities programs). Ideally these initiatives will be supported by open-access and inclusive discussion with all stakeholders in order to inform and educate the public, diversify energy market opportunities, and support long-term energy economic models that enable new business models to emerge.


9.4.	Consumer Behavior

Changing consumers’ behavior patterns has a huge potential not only to contribute to how microgrids and related technologies are accepted and ultimately adopted, but also to energy conservation and carbon reduction in general. The mind-sets of end-users of energy, building system managers, energy regulators and policy makers have the power to contribute significantly to energy consumption behaviours, environmental impact, and related issues. While technology is also a critical piece of the puzzle, the technology required to make the changes we are
 
discussing already exists. It is the choices made by consumers at all levels of the energy chain, from the selection of lightbulbs in the home, to making technologies available in the marketplace, to selecting and integrating technologies, which have the largest effect on realizing change. The vast majority of citizens, however, do not know how much energy their specific behaviors and choices consume, how much they cost, or what impact they have on a socio- economic and environmental scale. How to engage these different energy consumers in energy- smart behaviors is, therefore, a challenge. At the end of the day, the biggest hope for change is very likely to be triggered from the bottom-up, where pressure to change is exerted on governments by individuals through public interest groups.


Supporting renewable energy and reducing the impact of climate change requires promotion of cognitive, emotional, and behavioral change, through the use of methodologies, frameworks and tools drawn from a broad range of learning theories from across the education and health sectors. Some of the recent applications of behavior change have some roots in social learning theory from the 1960’s, developed around values of individuals, and what is and isn’t acceptable behavior. To support energy awareness and behavior change, these tools are being extended and more broadly marketed through use of information technology and social media.


Behavior change interventions generally include some form of feedback; energy audits; social norms; or nudging. Feedback can tak the form of direct feedback, indirect feedback, or a combination of direct and indirect feedback. Direct or real-time feedback includes consumption data from smart meters received via in-home displays, or computer monitors and hand-held devices. Indirect feedback includes information like historical or comparative information on
 
consumption data like the information that comes on electricity bills. Years of research have found that feedback is most effective as an intervention tool when direct and indirect feedback are used together. Energy audits provide the information needed to make energy efficiency improvements to an environment, and have the additional benefits of including engagement with consumers, which helps to reinforce the behavior changes. In the case of energy behaviors, social norms are a sets of energy consumption and conservation behaviors that are considered acceptable by a particular group. A consideration with use of social norms is the potential for people to feel shunned and isolated if they don’t conform. Nudge theory uses positive reinforcement through indirect suggestion to provide a less forced compliance with a concept.
For example to nudge people to public trash bins, a busy pedestrian street in Copenhagen has used painted footprints leading from the middle of the street off to the trash bins.


Approaches for evaluating behavior change include quantitative evaluation such as smart metering and analysis of billing data, quantitative surveys and self-reporting. There is a lot of appeal and potential for significant impact through data visualization of the numbers. Among other considerations, a quantitative approach needs to include consideration and measures of effectiveness, and testing for the reliability, to guide selection of the measures that are adopted. Qualitative evaluations include tools such as interviews, surveys, and focus groups. In the case of web-based or paper surveys both a pre and post survey are sometimes used. One may expect that a “before and after snapshot” approach could help better gauge the results, but in cases when it is not possible to gauge individual participants’ responses between the two surveys, for example when the post-surveys may not have been completed or returned by the same individuals from the pre-surveys, the outcomes may not be as expected. Surveys can introduce
 
bias, for example by asking leading questions or in cases where respondents self-select, and the design requires experienced input to help minimize this kind of risk.


In the case of campus microgrids many studies have been conducted within student housing in the form of competitions between different residence buildings. These studies generally have similar objectives including:
i.	Developing awareness in building residents of energy related issues, impacts and options

ii.	Investigating how building residents understand their own energy use patterns, for example, time of day and actual consumption levels, and how this understanding can help change behavior
iii.	Exploring how flexible building residents are willing to be in terms of the way in which they use their area and overhead lighting, electronic devices, appliances such as washing machines and dishwashers, and space heating
iv.	Investigating how use of tariffs and incentives, such as giveaways and rebates and time- of-use tariffs, could be used and to what effect
v.	Investigating how the use of behavioral and related theories could be applied or adapted for energy behaviors and to what effect.


Case Study for Behavior Change in the Campus Microgrid Student Residences:

Between January 2010 and December 2011, the Campus Microgrid conducted a research campaign into energy awareness and behavior change in the campus student residence houses. Activities include three short energy savings competitions between the residence buildings. The campus has just under 350 students living in seven residence houses, each house being of
 
approximately the same design and vintage, and all running on electricity. At the time of the competitions the annual energy consumption in the student residences was roughly one and a half megawatt hours, which comprised about 10% of the residences annual overall budget.




In December 2009, the Phase 1 of the Campus Microgrid project was completed, including integration and installation of smart meters to enable sub-metering across the campus at the building level, including each of the 7 houses. Campus Microgrid researchers had developed a basic research energy management system (EMS) to collect meter data to help monitor and manage the Campus Microgrid technology components. The EMS was extended to include a
 
Residence Web Portal (shown in Figure 9.1), in order to support energy behavior change research activities. Students had access to near-real-time feedback about the energy consumption in their own residence house, and the neighboring residences. This direct feedback tool supported students and researchers with their goals to increase awareness of energy use, reduce consumption, and to conduct research into behavioral change models and demand-side management strategies, for example, the use of incentives, nudging, social marketing, and the effect of time-of-use and similar tariffs. The Residence Web Portal presented students with tips on energy conservation choices, easy access to near real-time feedback about their electricity consumption and costs, meaningful equivalencies, environmental information and impact on greenhouse gases (GHGs). Additional feedback tools integrated with the Residence Web Portal included a leader board with up-to-the-minute rankings enabling students to compare their energy consumption against the consumption of the other residences houses, and a messaging tool that enabled students the option to receive customized messages from the EMS when consumption in their residence house reached the specified level.


Prior to each of the three competitions the students were invited to a short educational session on energy conservation. Awareness raising sessions included introductions to common terminologies, local energy conditions and realities, energy consumption and costs, and Campus Microgrid technologies installed in the residence houses, and around the campus. Students and researchers discussed examples of everyday energy-saving measures that would contribute to becoming the “winning” residence house. Students signed pledges to commit to their own energy conservation targets; were given tips on how much energy was consumed by typical behaviors; and were introduced to examples of nudging, and the use of prompts with their house-
 
mates. Before and after each of the competitions students were asked to voluntarily complete web-based surveys to help researchers gauge the participants’ awareness and attitudes. Where appropriate and possible, survey feedback was applied to improvements in the residences, such as the installation of low-flow shower heads, and adapting laundry rooms to include options for cold-water only machines.


Energy Conservation Competition #1 ran from January 18, 2010 to January 31, 2010. The goal of this competition was education and outreach, to make energy use visible, to see what impact that knowledge and visibility could have on energy consumption levels and to see how long any energy conservation might be sustained, and to identify the peak demand times. During the January 2010 competition, the winning residence house reduced its energy consumption by approximately 20% from the projected baseline. Two weeks following the competition, the average energy reduction for all houses bounced back up to only a 10% reduction, but that 10% savings was sustained for the remainder of the academic term.


Competition #2 was held for two one-month periods, October 2010 and November 2010. Some students would have been living in residence during the January competition. For those who were not, the second competition provided the opportunity to build on existing momentum while looping back to catch-up any students who were new to the student residences as of the September term start. The second round of competitions were designed to test hypotheses and leverage lessons learned from the first competition. It was suggested that the first competition was too short to support building of new habits, and that a longer competition period may result in more sustained energy use reductions. The longer, two month run for the competition was
 
intended to test this theory. The first competition identified two significant demand peaks during each weekday, one in the early morning and one in the early evening. These peaks appeared to coincide with morning showers and after school dinner and dish-washing. The primary goal of this second competition was to reduce consumption during the peak demand times, particularly during the morning. The concept of time-of-use TOU tariffs was introduced to students during the pre-competition educational session. It is important to note that the local utility doesn’t currently use any tariffs in their billing process. While the concept is common in other regions, both nationally and internationally, it was a new concept to the students in this study. The concept of time-of-use TOU tariffs was simulated in the EMS, and reflected in the display for the Residence Web Portal. The simulated tariff included different electricity rates for high-peak ($0.20/kWh), mid-peak ($0.10/kWh), and off-peak ($0.05/kWh). The rate structure was reflected in the Web Portal by use of different colored bars. Moreover, in-house designed and built intelligent load control systems were installed on Hot Water tanks to help optimize their temperature cycling demand (see Figure 9.2).
 






Over the course of the two competition months, the winning house lowered its peak electricity consumption by 20%. Overall reduction in electricity consumption for all Residences houses was about 14%. This resulted in a significant decrease in the Residence’s energy bill for this period with approximately $5000 in actual (not simulated) savings.


Competition #3 was held for a one month period running from October 31, 2011 to November 27, 2011. Like Competition #1, the third competition returned to the basic goal of using conservation strategies to reduce energy consumption. Additionally, Competition #3 introduced use of social media to investigate its potential to broaden energy awareness and engagement. In this case, students were asked to post photographs or videos of their most creative approaches to
 
reducing their energy use.





The competitions resulted in significant savings during the January 2010 competition, though the most savings occurred during the competition in October-November 2010, which carried through into December and even into the next semester (January to May). Figure 9.3 shows total energy savings over the two years period in which the competitions were held. Predicted energy consumption for the residences is based on historical data and is plotted against actual consumption data. When compared against predicted values, the actual energy consumption during the two-year period where competitions were held represents a total energy savings of almost 350,000 kWh, a reduction of just over 20% when measured against the predicted baseline energy consumption for that period. The results demonstrated for participants that changes in energy consumption behaviors alone, can make significant contributions towards reducing energy use and electricity costs. Figure 9.4, charted from the Campus Microgrid research findings, illustrates the degree to which behavior choices alone can impact energy consumption. The graph charts the savings achieved by each of the seven statistically similar student residence
 
houses, over the course of a one month competition. The gaps between each line on the graph indicates the difference in energy savings achieved between each house. The different savings can be fully attributed to the different individual energy conservation behaviors and collective strategies made by the students living in each residence house.




9.5.	Lessons Learnt

Historically, actions for change are often triggered by crises. In some cases the writing is on the wall long before the crisis is reached and actions taken. Every crisis is an opportunity, but, and this is especially true in cases like climate change where the opportunities have been before us for some time, opportunity should not be made to wait for a crisis. Making changes towards choosing renewable energy options, including microgrids, represents the opportunity for building a sustainable future for our planet. University campuses and other communities are integrating local generation and storage assets to create urban microgrids. The combination of rooftop solar
 
panels, power storage packs, electric vehicles, smart meters, and related equipment can make campuses, neighborhoods and cities more resilient and efficient, for example enabling communities to reduce peak loads, and support essential services during emergency power outages. Technology exists to knit Urban Microgrids together for sharing of power and resources. What is needed now is for wholesale, cross-discipline change in how we think and behave towards energy management and use. The legal, regulatory, and social barriers are playing a significant role in limiting the microgrid to more of a concept than a reality in Canada, but all the technologies exist to deliver on its promise. Though there are comparatively few microgrids in Canada, in the United States, it has been predicted [2] that microgrid capacity could reach close to 2,000 megawatts by the end of 2017. 
 
